
STEVE HARVEYSSTEEVEHARRVVEYY
Denene Millner
Lady,Act  Like a
THINK LIKE A
Man

This book is dedicated to all women.
My hope is to empower you with a wide-open 
look into the minds of men. 
Introduction
Everything  Y ou Need to Know About  
Men and Relationships Is Right Here  1
1 THE MIND-SET OF A MAN  
1 What Drives Men  11
2 Our Love Isn’t Like Y our Love  19
3 The Three Things Every Man Needs: 
Support, Loyalty, and the Cookie  37
4 “We Need to Talk,” and Other Words 
That Make Men Run for Cover  49 
2 WHY MEN DO WHAT THEY DO
5 First Things First: He Wants to Sleep  
with  Yo u 61
6 Sports Fish vs. Keepers: How Men 
Distinguish Between the Marrying T ypes and the 
Playthings  69
7 Mama’s Boys  85
8 Why Men Cheat 95
3 THE PLAYBOOK: 
HOW TO WIN THE GAME
9 Men Respect Standards—Get Some  115
10 The Five Questions Every  Woman Should 
Ask Before She Gets in T oo Deep  129
11 The Ninety-Day Rule: Getting the Respect 
Y ou Deserve  147
12 If He’s Meeting the Kids After  Y ou Decide 
He’s “the One,” It’s T oo Late  163
13 Strong, Independent—and Lonely—
Women  179
14 How to Get the Ring  193
15 Quick Answers to the Questions Y ou’ve 
Always Wanted to Ask  205
Acknowledgments  231
About the Author
Credits
Cover
Copyright
About the Publisher
V
I’ve ma de a living for more t han twent y years ma king people 
laugh—about themselves, about each other, about family,
and friends, and, most certain ly, about love, sex, an d rela-
tionships. My humor is always rooted in truth and full of wi s-
dom—t he kind that comes from living, watc hing, learnin g,
and knowing. I’m told my jokes strike chords with people be -
cause the y can relate to them, es peciall y the ones that ex plore
the dynamics o f relations hips between men an d women. It 
never ceases  to amaze me how much people talk about rel a-
tionships, think about them, rea d about them, as k about them—
even get in them without a clue how to move them forward. 
For sure, i f there’s an ything I’ve discovere d during my journe y
here on God’s earth, it’s this: (a) too many women are clueless 
about men, ( b) men get awa y with a whole lot of stuff in re la-EVERYTHIN G YOU NEED T O KNOW AB OUT ME N
AND RELATI ONSHIPS IS RIGHT HER E
tionships because women have never understood how men 
think, and (c) I’ve got some valuable information to change all 
of that.
I discovered this when my career transitioned to radio with 
the Steve Harvey Morning Show . Back when my show was based 
in Los Angeles, I created a segment called “Ask Steve,” during 
which women could call in and ask anything they wanted to 
about relationships. Anything. At the very least, I thought “Ask 
Steve” would lead to some good comedy, and at ﬁrst, that’s 
pretty much what it was all about for me—getting to the jokes. 
But it didn ’ t take me long to realize that what my listeners, 
mostly women, were going through wasn’t really a laughing 
matter. They had dozens of categories of needs and concerns in 
their lives that they were trying to get a handle on—dating, 
commitment, security, family baggage, hopes for tomorrow, 
spirituality, in-law drama, body image, aging, friendships, chil-
dren, work/home balance, education. You name the topic, 
somebody asked me about it. And heading up the list of topics 
women wanted to talk about was—you guessed it—men.
My female listeners really wanted answers—answers to 
how to get out of a relationship what they’re putting into it. 
On those “Ask Steve” segments, and later, through the 
“Strawberry Letters” segment I do on the current incarnation 
of the  Steve Harvey Morning Show , women have made clear that 
they want an even exchange with men: they want their love 
to be reciprocated in the same way they give it; they want 
their romantic lives to be as rewarding as they make them for 
their potential mates; they want the emotions that they turn 
on full blast to be met with the same intensity; and they expect 
the premium that they put on commitment to be equally ad-
hered to, valued, and respected. The problem for all too many 
women who call in to my radio show, though, is that they just 
can’t get that reciprocation from men, and women then end 
up feeling disappointed, disenfranchised, and disillusioned by 
their failed relationships.
When I step back from the jokes, and the microphone gets 
turned off and the lights in the studio go down, and I think 
about what women ask me every morning on my show, I get 
incredibly perplexed—perplexed because even though my 
callers have all presumably had some experience with men 
(whether they are friends, boyfriends, lovers, husband, fathers, 
brothers, or co-workers), these women still genuinely want to 
know how to get the love they want, need, and deserve. I’ve 
concluded that the truths they seek are never as obvious to 
them as they are to us men. Try as they might, women just 
don’t get us.
With this in mind, I stopped joking around and got very real 
with my audience. Through my answers, I started imparting 
wisdom about men—wisdom gathered from working more 
than half a century on one concept: how to be a man. I also 
spent countless hours talking to my friends, all of whom are 
men. They are athletes, movie and television stars, insurance 
brokers and bankers, guys who drive trucks, guys who coach 
basketball teams, ministers and deacons, Boy Scout leaders, 
store manager, ex-cons, inmates, and yes, even hustlers. And 
one simple thing is true about each of us: we are very simple 
 people and all basically think in a similar way.
When I ﬁlter my answers through that lens of how men view 
relationships, the women in my audience start to understand 
why the complexities and nuances they drag into each of their 
relationships with the opposite sex really serve them no justice. 
I teach them very quickly that expecting a man to respond to 
them the way a woman would is never going to work. They 
then realize that a clear-eyed, knowing approach to dealing 
with men on their terms, on their turf, in their way, can, in 
turn, get women exactly what they want.
Indeed, my advice for the folks who called in on the “Ask 
Steve” segment of the  Steve Harvey Morning Show  became so 
popular that fans—women and men—started asking me when 
I was going to write a relationship book—something to help 
the women who genuinely want to be in a solid, committed 
relationship ﬁgure out how to get one, and help the men ready 
for those relationships to be recognized for what they can and 
are willing to bring to the table. I have to admit: I didn’t 
really see the value of writing a relationship book at ﬁrst. 
What, after all, did I have to add to the conversation beyond 
the answers I give to an audience of millions every morning? 
Even bigger than that, how could I be taken seriously? Hell, 
I’m not a writer.
But then I started thinking about the relationships that I’ve 
had in my lifetime, talked to some of my male friends and some 
of my female co-workers and associates, and put together a few 
informal focus groups. I considered the impact that relation-
ships have on each of us, and especially the impact they’ve had 
on me. My father? He was married to my mother for sixty-four 
years. My mother was invaluable to him. And she was invalu-
able to me—the most inﬂuential person in my life. Equally 
valuable to me are my wife and my children. In fact, my girls 
and my concern for their future inspire me here as well. They 
will all grow up and reach for the same dream most women do: 
The husband. Some kids. A house. A happy life. True love. And 
I want desperately for my children to avoid being misguided 
and misled by the games men have created just to perpetrate the 
greed and selﬁshness we tend to show the world until we 
become the men God wants us to be. I know—because of my 
mother, my wife, my daughters, and the millions of women 
who listen to my show every morning—that women need a 
voice, someone to help get them through and decipher the 
muck, so they can get what they’re truly after. I ﬁgured I could 
be that guy to wave across the fence and say, “I’m going to tell 
you the secrets—the real deal about men, the things we wish 
you knew about us, but that we really don’t want you to know, 
lest we lose the game.”
In essence, Act Like a Lady, Think Like a Man  is a playbook 
of sorts. You remember how a few years back, the New En-
gland Patriots got accused of one of the biggest cheating scan-
dals in NFL history? NFL investigators found out that the team 
had been secretly videotaping practices and reading mouths to 
ﬁgure out the plays of their opposing teams—a practice that 
gave them a distinct advantage over their rivals. For sure, the 
Patriots’ dirty ways were almost as advantageous to the New 
England team as if they were reading the opposition’s playbook. 
With the advantage, the Patriots were able to win games.
This is what I wish for the women who read Act Like a Lady, 
Think Like a Man . I want every woman who truly wants a solid 
relationship but just can’t ﬁgure out how to get one, and those 
who are already in a relationship and trying to ﬁgure out how 
to make it better, to forget everything she’s ever been taught 
about men—erase the myths, the heresy, everything your 
mother told you, everything your girlfriends told you, all t he 
advice you’ve read in magazines and seen on television—and 
ﬁnd out here, in these pages, who men really are. What men 
count on is that you’ll continue to get your advice from other 
women who do not know our tactics or our mind-set. Act Like 
a Lady, Think Like a Man  is going to change this for you. If 
you’re dating, and you want to ﬁnd out how to take it to another 
level, this book is for you. If you’re in a committed relations hip, 
and you want to get the ring, this book is for you. If you’re 
married and you want to regain control and strengthen your 
bond, or if you’re tired of being played with, then I want you to 
use this book as a tool—to take each of the principles, rules, 
and tips in this no-nonsense guide and use them to anticipate a 
man’s game plan, and to counter with an offense and defense 
that’s unstoppable. Because trust me: the playbook you all have 
been using is outdated, and the plays don’t work. In fact, the 
biggest play you have in your arsenal—the one where you walk 
into a relationship thinking you’re going to “change” your man, 
is the worst and most doomed play of them all. Why? Because 
no matter what other women are shouting from the covers of 
magazines, on the television talk shows, during your girlfriend 
getaway bonding trips, and on blogs from here to Timbuktu, 
there are basic things in men that are never going to change. 
No matter how good you are to a man, no matter how good 
you are for him, until you understand what his makeup is, what 
drives him, what motivates him, and how he loves, you will be 
vulnerable to his deception and the games he plays.
But with this book, you can get into a man’s mind-set and 
understand him better, so that you can put into play your plans, 
your dreams, and your desires, and best of all, you can ﬁgure 
out if he’s planning to be with you or just playing with you.
So act like a lady, and think like a man.

The Mind-Set 
of a ManPART ONE

1
What Drives Men
 There is no truer statement: men are simple. Get this 
into your head ﬁrst, and everything you learn about 
us in this book will begin to fall into place. Once you 
get that down, you’ll have to understand a few essential truths: 
men are driven by who they are, what they do, and how much 
they make. No matter if a man is a CEO, a CON, or both, 
everything he does is ﬁltered through his title (who he is), how 
he gets that title (what he does), and the reward he gets for the 
effort (how much he makes). These three things make up the 
basic DNA of manhood—the three accomplishments every 
man must achieve before he feels like he’s truly fulﬁlled his 
destiny as a man. And until he’s achieved his goal in those three 
areas, the man you’re dating, committed to, or married to will 
be too busy to focus on you.
Think about it: from the moment a boy is born, the ﬁrst 
thing everyone around him starts doing is telling him what he 
must do to be a real man. He is taught to be tough—to wrestle, 
climb, get up without crying, not let anyone push him around. 
He is taught to work hard—to do chores around the house, get 
the groceries out of the car, take out the trash, shovel the snow, 
cut the grass, and, as soon as he’s old enough, get a job. He is 
taught to protect—to watch out for his mother and his younger 
siblings, to watch over the house and the family’s property. And 
he is especially encouraged to uphold his family name—make 
something of himself so that when he walks in a room, every-
body is clear about who he is, what he does, and how much he 
makes. Each of these things is taught in preparation for one 
thing: manhood.
The pursuit of manhood doesn’t change once a boy is 
grown. In fact, it’s only magniﬁed. His focus has always been 
on, and will remain on, who he is, what he does, and how 
much he makes until he feels like he’s achieved his mission. 
And until a man does these things, women only ﬁt into the 
cracks of his life. He’s not thinking about settling down, 
having children, or building a home with anyone until he’s 
got all three of those things in sync. I’m not saying that he has 
had to have made it, but at least he has to be on track to 
making it.
This is certainly how it worked for me. I’ll never forget how 
disappointed, frustrated, and unhappy I was when, in my early 
twenties, I was laid off from the Ford Motor Company. I was 
already a college dropout, and now, without a job, I hardly had 
enough money to take care of myself, much less a family. This 
left me unsure of my future—what I was going to do, how 
much I was going to make, and what my title would be. The 
titles “college graduate” and “Ford inspector” were gone; 
having no job pretty much meant that my chances of bringing 
home a good paycheck were zero; and I hadn’t a clue how I was 
going to make money. It took me a while to ﬁnd my footing. 
I dabbled in various jobs: I owned a carpet cleaning business; 
I sold carpet; I sold Amway products, the Dick Gregory Baha-
mian Diet, and ALW Insurance and Commonwealth Insurance. 
It was madness what I was doing to try to get my life together. 
Finding someone serious to settle down with was the absolute 
last thing on my mind.
Then, one night a woman for whom I used to write jokes 
encouraged me to go to a local comedy club and sign up for 
amateur night. See, I knew I was funny, and I made a few 
dollars—very few dollars—writing material for up-and-coming 
local comedians who were trying to ﬁnd their way into the 
industry. But I hadn’t a clue, really, how to go about getting 
into the business for myself. Still, this woman saw something in 
me and told me to take the stage.
So I did. And I killed. I won $50—which today may not 
seem like a lot of money, but when I was broke at that time, it 
felt like $5,000—for telling jokes. I also was guaranteed an-
other ﬁfty dollars if, as the winner, I opened the following 
week’s amateur night competition. The next day, I went to a 
printer and spent ﬁfteen dollars of my winnings on business 
cards that, along with my phone number, read: Steve Harvey. 
Comedian. They were ﬂat and ﬂimsy and didn’t have any raised 
lettering, but those business cards announced that I was Steve 
Harvey (who I am), and that I had a special talent in comedy 
(what I do). How much I was going to make remained to be 
seen, but at least I had the “who I am” and the “what I do” 
lined up.
If men aren’t pursuing their dreams—if we’re not chasing 
the “who we are,” the “what we do,” and the “how much we 
make,” we’re doomed. Dead. But the moment that we ﬁgure 
out the puzzle and feel like our dreams are taking shape, new 
life breathes into us—it makes us vibrant, enthuses, and ani-
mates us. From the moment I became a comedian, I stepped 
onto that stage ready to be the very best.
Even today, no matter how tired I am, no matter what is 
going on in my life, I am never late for work, and I’ve never 
once missed a gig. Why? Because when I wake up, my dream is 
in check; I’m living it out live and in color every day, whether 
it’s on the radio during the  Steve Harvey Morning Show,  or on 
television with my various projects, or onstage, during my Steve 
Harvey Live  shows. Who I am is certain—I’m Steve Harvey. 
What I do is certain: comedy. And how much I make is right 
in line with what I’ve always wanted for my family and me.
And now, I can pay attention to my family. All the faux 
paint in my house, the metal ceilings, the leather chairs, the 
dogs outside, the cars in the yard, college tuition for my kids—
everything is paid for, everyone is set. I can provide for them 
the way I’ve always wanted to, I can protect them the way that 
I was raised to, and in my family’s eyes, I am, unquestionably, 
a man. Which means I have a clear mind when I go to sleep 
at night.
This is the drive that every man has, whether he’s the best 
player in the NBA, or the best peewee football coach in rural 
Minnesota; whether he’s the head of a Fortune 500 company, 
or the supervisor on the line at the local bakery; whether he’s 
the kingpin of a major cartel, or the chief corner boy on the 
block. Encoded in the DNA of the male species is that we are 
to be the provider and the protector of the family, and every-
t h i n g  w e  d o  i s  g e a r e d  t o w a r d  e n s u r i n g  w e  c a n  m a k e  t h i s  
happen. If a man can afford a place to stay, then he can protect 
his family from the elements; if he can afford a pair of sneakers 
for his child, he can feel conﬁdent enough to send him or her 
to school feeling secure and upbeat; if he can afford meat at the 
grocery store, then he can feel assured that he can feed his 
family. This is all any man wants; anything less, and he doesn’t 
feel like a man.
Even more, we want to feel like we’re number one. We want 
to be The Best somewhere. In charge. We know we’re not 
going to be head man in every situation, but somewhere in our 
lives, we’re going to be the one everyone answers to because 
it’s that important to us. We want the bragging rights—the 
right to say , “I’ m number one. ” W omen don ’ t seem to care 
about this so much. But for us men? It’s everything. After we’ve 
attained that, it’s critical that we can show off what we get for 
being number one. We have to be able to ﬂaunt it, and women 
have to be able to see it—otherwise, what’s the use of being 
number one?
Y ou need to know this because you have to understand a 
man’s motivation—why he’s not home, why he spends so much 
time working, why he’s watching his money the way he does. 
Because in his world, he’s being judged by other men, based on 
who he is, what he does, and how much he makes. That affects 
his mood. If you know he’s not where he wants to be or not on 
track for being where he wants to be, then his mood swings at 
the house will make more sense to you. Your inability to get 
him to sit and just talk now makes sense. His “on the grind” 
mentality becomes more clear to you. Really, it’s all tied to the 
three things that drive him.
So if this is on his mind, and he hasn’t lined up the who he 
is, the what he does, and the how much he makes in the way 
that he sees ﬁt, he can’t possibly be to you what he wants to 
be. Which means that you can’t really have the man you want. 
He can’t sit around talking with you, or dream about marriage 
and family, if his mind is on how to make money, how to get 
a better position, how to be the kind of man he needs to be 
for you.
In my experience, these facts don’t always sit well with most 
women. Many of you ﬁgure that if a man truly loves you, the 
two of you should be able to pursue your dreams together. Sta-
bility is important to you, but you’d rather build the foundation 
of your relationship together, no matter the man’s station i n life. 
This is honorable, but really, it’s not the way men work. His eye 
will be on the prize, and that prize may not necessarily be you 
if he isn’t up where he wants to be in life. It’s impossible for us 
to focus on the two—we’re just not that gifted, sorry.
Mind you, a man doesn’t have to make a lot of money right 
now; as long as he sees his dreams being realized—the title is  
clear to him, his position is leading him in the direction of the 
place where he wants to be, and he knows the money will 
come—then he can rest a little easier, recognizing that he’s on 
the verge of becoming the man he wants to be. The way you 
can help him get there is to help him focus on his dream, see 
the vision, and implement his plan. If you can see yourself in 
that plan (you can get a clearer sense of this in my chapter “The 
Five Questions Every Woman Should Ask Before She Gets in 
Too Deep”), then latch on to it. Because when he reaches the 
level of success he’s hoping to reach, he’ll be a better, happier 
man for it—and you will be happy, too.

2
Our Love Isn’t Like 
Your Love
 Nothing on this planet can compare with a woman’s 
love—it is kind and compassionate, patient and nur-
turing, generous and sweet and unconditional. Pure. 
If you are her man, she will walk on water and through a 
mountain for you, too, no matter ho w you ’ ve acted out, no 
matter what crazy thing you’ve done, no matter the time or 
demand. If you are her man, she will talk to you until there just 
aren’t any more words left to say, encourage you when you’re 
at rock bottom and think there just isn’t any way out, hold you 
in her arms when you’re sick, and laugh with you when you’re 
up. And if you’re her man and that woman loves you—I mean 
really loves you?—she will shine you up when you’re dusty, 
encourage you when you’re down, defend you even when she’s 
not so sure you were right, and hang on your every word, even 
when you’re not saying anything worth listening to. And no 
matter what you do, no matter how many times her friends say 
you’re no good, no matter how many times you slam the door 
on the relationship, she will give you her very best and then 
some, and keep right on trying to win over your heart, even 
when you act like everything she’s done to convince you she’s 
The One just isn’t good enough.
That’s a woman’s love—it stands the test of time, logic, and 
all circumstance.
And this is exactly how you all expect us men to love you in 
return. Ask any woman what kind of love she wants from a 
man, and it will sound something like this: I want him to be 
humble and smart, fun and romantic, sensitive and gentle, and, 
above all, supportive. I want him to look in my eyes and tell me 
I’m beautiful and that I complete him. I want a man who is 
vulnerable enough to cry when he’s hurting, who will introduce 
me to his mother with a smile on his face, who loves children 
and animals, and who is willing to change diapers and wash 
dishes and do it all without me having to ask. And if he has a 
nice body and a lot of money and expensive shoes without 
scuffs, that would be great, too. Amen.
Well, I’m here to tell you that expecting that kind of love—
that perfection—from a man is unrealistic. That’s right, I said 
it—it’s not gonna happen, no way, no how. Because a man’s 
love isn’t like a woman’s love.
Don’t get it confused, now—I’m not saying that we’re not 
capable of loving. I’m just saying that a man’s love is different—
much more simple, direct, and probably a little harder to come 
by. I’ll tell you this much: a man who is in love with you is 
probably not going to call you every half hour and give you an 
update on how much more he loves you at 5:30 P.M. than he did 
at 5:00 P.M.; he’s not going to sit around stroking your hair and 
wiping your brow with cold compresses while you sip hot tea 
and nurse yourself back to health.
His love is still love, though.
It’s just different from the love that women give and, in a lot 
of cases, want.
I argue that if you simply recognize how, exactly, a man 
loves, you might ﬁnd that the man standing in front of you is, 
indeed, giving you his all and then some. How do you know 
when a man loves you? Simple: he will do each of the following 
three things.
 P
If your man loves you, he’s willing to tell anybody and ev-
erybody, “Look, man, this is my woman” or “this is my girl,” 
“my baby’s mama,” or “my lady.” In other words, you will have 
a title—an ofﬁcial one that far extends beyond “this is my 
friend,” or “this is__________ (insert your name here).” That’s 
because a man who has placed you in the most special part of 
his heart—the man who truly has feelings for you—will give 
you a title. That title is his way of letting everyone within the 
sound of his voice know that he’s proud of being with you, and 
that he has plans for you. He sees himself in a long-term, com-
mitted relationship with you, and he’s professing it for all to 
hear because he’s serious about this thing—it may be the begin-
ning of something special.
A man who professes you as his own is also saying in not so 
many words that he’s claiming you—that you are his. Now he’s 
put everyone on notice. Any man who hears another man say, 
“this is my lady,” knows that whatever games/tricks/plans/
schemes he may have had in mind for the pretty, sexy lady 
standing in front of him need to be shelved until the next single 
woman comes in the room, because another man has professed 
out loud that “this one is mine and she’s not available for any-
thing you were plotting and planning.” It’s a special signal we 
men all recognize and respect as the universal code for “off-
limits.”
If he introduces you as his “friend,” or by your name, have 
no doubt that’s all you are. He doesn’t think any more of you 
than that. In your heart of hearts, ladies, you all know this. 
Indeed, when I explained this to a friend of mine, she just 
laughed and laughed because she could identify with it—saw it 
up close at an annual Christmas dinner she’s been attending 
with her family and some close friends for going on twelve 
years. One guy, she said, would show up every year with a new 
chick—each one prettier than the last—and a new story about 
his job or his vacation or his new business venture or whatever. 
While the stories and the women kept changing, the one thing 
that remained constant was this: none of those women ever got 
introduced as his girlfriend or lady. They were always, without 
hesitation, presented by their name. Period. And then he would 
spend the rest of the night cuddling a hard drink and catching 
up with old friends and colleagues, leaving her to sit at the table 
by herself, looking out of place and ridiculous in her fancy 
dress, trying her best to ﬁt in. Everyone at the table pretty much 
knew that the moment the  couple hit the door and went on 
their way, none of the regular party attendees would ever see 
her with him again.
Then one recent Christmas party, he showed up with a new 
woman—his ﬁngers all intertwined with hers, both of them 
smiling like Cheshire cats. He introduced her as his “lady,” and 
instantly, everyone knew what was up. But it wasn’t just be-
cause of the title he’d assigned; it was because of the actions 
behind it. He was holding her hand, looking directly at her 
when he talked to her, introducing her around to everyone—
from the business folks to his really good friends—running to 
the bar to get drinks for her, and dancing with her like he didn’t 
want the night to end. And when everyone left that evening, 
they all knew they’d be seeing that woman again, ﬁngers inter-
twined with the hitherto eternal playboy bachelor, one who 
changed women as often as Diana Ross changes costumes at a 
concert.
And wouldn’t you know it? When they came back to that 
same function the next year, she had a new title: ﬁancée. For 
sure, she was in this man’s plans.
So, if you’ve been dating a guy for at least ninety days and 
you’ve never met his mother, you don’t go to church together, 
you haven’t been around his family or his friends, and he took you 
to a networking/job/social function and introduced you by your 
name, then you’re not in his plans—he doesn’t see you in his future. 
But the minute he assigns a title—the moment he lays claim to 
you in front of  people who mean something to him in his life, 
whether it’s his boy, his sister, or his boss—that’s the minute 
you know your man is making a statement. He is professing his 
intentions for you—and professing them to the  people who 
need to know that information. A profession is key—you will 
know if a man is serious about you once he claims you.
 P
Once we’ve claimed you, and you’ve returned the honor, we’re 
going to start bringing home the bacon. Simply put, a man who 
loves you will bring that money home to make sure that you and 
the kids have what you all need. That is our role—our purpose. 
Society has told us men for millennium that our primary function 
is to make sure our families are set—whether we’re alive or dead, 
the  people we love need want for nothing. This is the very core 
of manhood—to be the provider. That’s what it’s all about. (Okay, 
there are a few other things; for example, how well you’re en-
dowed—and I’m not talking ﬁnancially—and how well can you 
provide—now, I am talking ﬁnancially.) If a man is in a position 
of being questioned about whether he’s able to provide, ﬁnancially 
and otherwise, for the ones he loves, you might as well drop-kick 
his ego into an early grave. The more he can provide for his 
woman and his kids, the bigger and more alive he feels. Sounds 
simplistic, but that is the reality.
As a provider, a man pays the bills that have to be paid—the 
rent, the heat and light bill, the car note; he buys groceries; he 
pays school tuition; and he takes care of other household ex-
penditures. He will not spend his money on triﬂing things and 
come to you with what’s left, and he will not selﬁshly give you 
a little cut and take the rest for himself. And a man who truly 
loves you would never make you ask for money for necessities—
he would make sure that you need and mostly want for noth-
ing, because every pat on the back he gets for bringing more 
money into the house, every kiss he gets for handing over cash 
for school clothes and supplies and toys, every bit of apprecia-
tion he gets for keeping the lights and cable on, boosts his prow-
ess as a man. That’s why, if he’s a real man, he will always put 
buying something for himself far below his responsibility to 
provide for his family. His need for another set of golf clubs or 
expensive shoes or a fancy car or anything else men like to 
spend their money on will pale in comparison to providing for 
loved ones, because those golf clubs can’t make him square his 
shoulders the way true appreciation from a woman can. Conse-
quently, everything he does is going to be about trying to make 
sure the woman he loves has what she needs.
Now I know that expecting a man to care for you ﬁnan-
cially, no questions asked, in an age in which women have been 
raised to be ﬁnancially independent of men gives you pause; 
if you’ve been taught all your life to go dutch on your dates 
and pull out your own checkbook when it comes to paying 
your bills, and you’ve been repeatedly told that you can’t 
depend on a man to do anything for you, then it’s understand-
able why you can’t wrap your mind around this simple concept. 
But remember what drives a man; real men do what they have 
to do to mak e sure th eir  people are taken care of, clothed, 
housed, and reasonably satisﬁed, and if they’re doing anything 
less than that, they’re not men—or shall we say, he’s not your 
man, because he will eventually do this for someone’s daught er, 
maybe not you.
For sure, all too many men shirk this responsibility, whether 
out of selﬁshness, stupidity, or sheer inability or a combination 
of all three. But some men simply do not have the education, 
resources, and wherewithal to make an adequate amount of har d 
cash. And if a man can’t provide, then he doesn’t feel like a ma n, 
so he ﬂees to escape the horrible feelings of inadequacy, or he’ s 
going to bury those feelings in drugs and alcohol. Indeed, you 
can probably trace a whole host of the pathologies exhibited by 
the most triﬂing of men back to their inability to provide. Some 
try to use crime to make up for it (clearly, our prisons tell us 
that’s not working); some use drugs (our street corners tell us 
that’s not working, either); some just run (the numbers of women 
raising kids alone, and falling into poverty because of it, tell us 
that’s deﬁnitely not working). But ask any one of those men 
who aren’t doing right by themselves or the ones they love what 
they regret most, and I’ll bet you a majority of them will say the 
same thing: they wish they had the ability to provide.
Of course, some men simply refuse to share the money in 
their pockets with their women. As some rap songs and hip-
hop magazines tell you, these men feel they’re being “played” 
if they provide anything of monetary value to the opposite sex. 
Some men even label any and every woman who expects her 
intended to provide for her the very handy, decisively ugly 
phrase gold digger.  Oh, when it comes to women, that phrase 
gets tossed around these days like dough in a New York City 
pizza parlor. In fact, men have set it up so well that we’ve got 
women thinking that if they remotely expect a man to pay for 
their dinner, or buy them a drink at the bar, or set any ﬁnancial 
requirements for their man, then they’re gold diggers.
I’m here to tell you, though, ladies, that the term “gold 
digger” is one of the traps we men set to keep you off our 
money trail; we created that term for you so that we can have 
all of our money and still get everything we want from you 
without you asking for or expecting this very basic, instinctual 
responsibility that men all over the world are obligated to 
assume and embrace. It’s a “get-over” term, ladies—one that 
has a very legitimate premise (there are, of course, women who 
date and marry men solely for the cold, hard cash), but one that 
has been wrongly and almost universally applied to any woman 
who has made clear that she expects her man to fulﬁll his duty 
as a man. Know this: It is your right to expect that a man will pay for 
your dinner, your movie ticket, your club entry fee, or whateve r else he 
has to pay for in exchange for your time.  You all have to stop this 
foolishness with the “I pay for my dinner so he knows I don’t 
need him” approach. As I point out in the next chapter, “The 
Three Things Every Man Needs: Support, Loyalty, and the 
Cookie,” a man—a real one, anyway—wants to feel needed. 
And the easiest way to help him get that high is to  let him pro-
vide for you. This is only fair.
And if he loves you? Oh, he’s going to bring every cent 
home to you. He’s not going to come back from gambling all 
his money away, saying, “Here’s $100—that’s all I got this 
week.” He’s going to come straight home with that check, and 
if there’s anything left over after he takes care of each and e very 
one of your needs, well, then he’ll play. This is man business, 
baby. It’s how we do.
Now, there are different ways to provide besides monetarily. 
Your man could be broke, but he’s going to do everything 
within his power to make up for this by supplying your needs 
in other tangible ways. If you’re running low on groceries, he 
may not be able to give you money to go to the store, but he 
might have a little extra something in his refrigerator and pantry 
to hold you over until he can give you a  couple of dollars. In 
other words, he’s not going to let you go hungry. If your car is 
broken down, he may not be able to pay for a mechanic, but he 
can call his buddies over to help him move your ride to the side 
of the road and give you rides to work until he ﬁgures out how 
to pay for your car to get ﬁxed. If you need some pictures hung, 
and the sink unclogged, and a new garage door installed, a man 
who loves you will climb up a twenty-foot ladder to get that 
picture up on the wall, put a bucket down to catch the over-
ﬂowing water from the sink while he goes to ﬁnd the right part 
he needs to ﬁx the pipes, and pore through the instruction 
manual for hours to ﬁgure out how to get that garage door in. 
Providing for the ones he loves and cares about, whether it’s 
monetarily or with sweat equity, is a part of a man’s DNA, and 
if he loves and cares for you, this man will provide for you all 
these things with no limits.
 P
When a man truly loves you, anybody who says, does, sug-
gests, or even thinks about doing something offensive to you stands 
the risk of being obliterated. Your man will destroy anything and 
everything in his path to make sure that whoever disrespected 
you pays for it. This is his nature. You pick most any male spe-
cies on the planet, and the same is true: no one is going to dis-
respect their family without paying a cost—or at least putting 
up a serious ﬁght. This is innate—recognized and respected 
from the ﬁrst relationship that a boy has, that relationship being 
with his mother. He may not know what unconditional love is 
yet, but a boy child will never (a)admit that his mother is 
capable of making mistakes, or (b) let someone say or do some-
thing to his mother. This is taught to males practically from the 
womb—cover your mother, protect her, don’t let anybody say 
anything about her or do anything to her, and if they do, let 
them know it’s time to take it outside. This is most certainly  the 
way it was taught in my house, too. I remember distinctly when  
I was a little boy, probably around age eight or so, standing 
there waiting for my mother to pull on her coat for our bus ride 
downtown. My father came in the room and said, very simply, 
“You and your mother are going downtown—watch out for 
your mother.” That was rule number one in my father’s house: 
Do not come back in this house without your mother and your 
sisters. You might as well kill yourself or get on a bus and go 
somewhere else, but don’t come back without your mother and 
the girls. Now, I knew good and hell well that if anybody so 
much as raised a ﬁnger to my mother, I wouldn’t be able to do 
anything about it—that she was really taking care of me on that 
bus. But, buddy, I’d be on the bus and in the store with my 
little chest stuck out, swearing I was doing something to protect 
my family.
Because that was what I was supposed to do.
Indeed, that is what every man is supposed to—and is willing 
to do—for the  people for whom he professes and provides. 
Once he says he cares about you, you are a prized possession to 
him, he will do anything to protect that prized possession. I f 
he’s hearing you argue with a bill collector, he’s going to say, 
“Who are you talking to? Let me talk to him right quick.” If 
your ex is calling and bringing drama in your life, your man is 
going to talk to him about it. If he sees your kids are cutting up 
and getting out of hand, he’s going to talk to them, too. In 
other words, he’s going to be providing protection and leader-
ship for his family because he knows a real man is a protector. 
There is not a real man living who will not protect what is his. 
It’s about respect.
I’d argue that this is most certainly one of the key things any 
woman wants in her man, because it is what girls have been 
raised to expect—that they can count on the most important 
men in their lives to go to battle for them, and keep them safe 
from all harm, no matter the cost. I think you all know this so 
well that you take great care in letting a man who loves you 
know when someone’s been a threat or danger to you, because 
you know that your man—whether he be your father, brother, 
un c l e ,  h u s b an d ,  o r  l o v e r — i s  g o in g  t o  d o  e v e ryt hin g  in  hi s  
power and then some to defend your honor. Maybe even hurt 
somebody, despite the consequences. For instance, you probably 
don’ t really want to hype what’ s going on down at your job 
because he might head down to the job and have a few words 
with your boss if necessary. And we all know that would not be 
a good situation.
I remember one time when my mother was at home and the 
insurance man came by looking for some money my mother 
didn’t have. My father was at work, so he didn’t actually witness 
this man come to our front door and say to my mother, “The next 
time I come here, you better have this money or else.” My dad 
got wind of the situation from one of my siblings, and when he 
asked my mother what, exactly, this man said to her, she hesi-
tated and hemmed and hawed for a long time before she ﬁnally 
broke down and told my father about the exchange. She didn’t 
really want to tell him what went down because she knew my 
father would snap. When he ﬁnally had the information he 
needed, my father came to me and asked what time the insur-
ance man usually shows up, and I told him. And the next time 
that man came by the house, my father was there waiting for 
him. I’ll never forget the image; that man never made it past 
the back of his car. When we looked out the window, my father 
had that man bent over the car with both his hands on that 
man’s neck. “If you ever say anything disrespectful to my wife 
again, I will kill you,” he said. Now, that may seem a little ex-
treme, but this is what real men do to protect the ones they 
love.
Protection isn’t just about using brute, physical force against 
someone, though. A man who truly cares about or loves you 
can and will protect you in other ways, whether it be with 
advice, or stepping up to perform a task that he thinks is too 
dangerous for you to do. For instance, if it’s dark outside, he 
may not want you to put the car in the driveway or walk the 
dog by yourself because he fears for your safety; in this instance, 
he’ll move the cars and walk the dog himself, even if he’s just 
off a double shift, so that you can be inside where it’s safe. If 
you’re walking by someone who looks like he might be a threat, 
a man who loves you is going to protect you by putting himself 
between you and that guy as you walk by so if he tries any-
thing, he’ll have to get through your man before he so much as 
lays a ﬁnger on you.
My wife, Marjorie, still cracks up when she thinks about 
how I “protected” her on a recent joint ﬁshing and diving trip 
we took in Maui. See, my wife is a certiﬁed scuba diver. I am 
not. When we got out on those choppy waters of the Paciﬁc 
Ocean, I couldn’t help but feel like something was going to 
happen to my wife down there, and I wouldn’t have any way of 
protecting her. Nonetheless, she put on all the equipment and 
began to descend into the water. I got antsy and immediately 
started lighting up cigars and walking around the boat explain-
ing to the dive masters that “this one has to come back.” By the 
time she was actually under the water, I’d told my security guy, 
who can’t scuba dive, to put on his snorkel and get in and keep 
an eye on her. I’d also told everyone onboard—from my man-
ager to the captain—that “if my wife is not back up here in 
thirty-ﬁve minutes, everybody’s putting on some suits and 
we’re going to go get her.” The guy leading the expedition said 
as nicely as he could, “Sir, everybody can’t go down to save one 
person,” but his words meant nothing to me. “I’m telling you,” 
I said, getting a little more jumpy with each word, “Either ev-
erybody goes down there to save her, or I’m killing everybody 
on the boat. This boat goes nowhere without her, and if it pulls 
off and she’s not on it, that’s it for everybody.”
My wife must have sensed something was up because sud-
denly, she was back above water. She knew that I was acting up. 
And rather than dive, she returned to the boat, because she 
knew how nervous I was about the whole idea of her submerged 
under water where I couldn’t act on my natural instincts to 
protect her; she ﬁgured it was better to sit that dive out. She 
understands that primal need I have to make sure nothing bad 
happens to her. Marjorie is a pretty adventurous girl, but she’s 
cut out a lot of that stuff—the diving and parasailing and such—
for that very reason. I ﬁnally get the woman of my dreams and 
while she’s out having fun the parachute wire jams and next 
thing I know she’s ﬂying into walls, or she’s diving and the 
scuba tank doesn’t work? Her life is in jeopardy and I can’t do 
anything about it? No sir. Nope. No more of that. My philoso-
phy for having a good time is that you have to have a good time 
and return home in one piece so you can tell everybody about 
your good time. My wife doesn’t trip about this; she just says, 
“Thanks for caring, honey.”
And I do care about her, so my DNA screams out to me to 
protect her and provide for her and profess about her in any way 
that I can. This, by the way, is how our fathers did it, and their 
fathers, and their fathers, too—to the best of their natural abil-
ity and with the help of God, even in the most adverse times 
when protecting and providing and even professing were nei-
ther easy nor, in the case of black men, allowed. We’ve lost si ght 
of this—stopped demanding it from our men. Maybe it’s because 
there are so many women left to raise their children alone, or 
maybe it’s because there just haven’t been enough men teaching 
our boys how to be true men. But I ﬁrmly believe that a real 
woman can bring out the best in a man; sometimes we need 
only meet a real woman other than our own mother to bring 
out our best qualities. That, however, requires something of the 
woman; she’s got to demand that every man stand and deliver. 
On the radio show and in my everyday interactions with my col-
leagues and friends, I constantly hear women say that there aren’t 
any good men and complain about all the things men won’t do. 
But I contend they don’t do the things that real men are expected 
to do because no one—especially, women— requires  it of them 
(see my chapter “Men Respect Standards—Get Some”).
 I n sum, ladies, you have to stop heaping your own deﬁni-
tion of love on men and recognize that men love differently. 
A man’s love ﬁts only into three categories. As I’ve explained, 
I call them “The Three Ps of Love—Profess, Provide, and Pro-
tect.” A man may not go shopping with you to buy the new 
dress for your ofﬁce party, but a real man will escort you to that 
party, hold your hand, and proudly introduce you all around 
the party as his lady (profess); he may not cuddle you and sit by 
the bed holding your hand while you’re sick, but a real man 
who loves you will make sure the prescription is ﬁlled, heat up 
a can of soup, and make sure everybody is in position until you 
are better (provide); and he may not willingly change diapers, 
wash the dishes, and rub your feet after a hot bath, but a real 
man who loves you sure will walk through a mountain and on 
water before he’d let someone bring any hurt or harm to you 
(protect). This much you can believe.
If you’ve got a man who does these things for you, trust me, 
he’s all in.
3
The Three Things 
Every Man Needs
 Women are complicated creatures. You need stuff. 
Lots of it. And you expect your man to provide it, 
even if you haven’t explained what it is you need 
and want, or even if what you needed and wanted ﬁve minutes 
ago is wholly different from what you need and want now. In 
fact, I’ve said over and over again jokingly that the only way a 
woman can truly be completely satisﬁed is to get herself four 
different men—an old one, an ugly one, a Mandingo, and a gay 
guy. Now the four of them combined? They got you covered. 
The old man—he’ll sit around the house with you, spend his 
pension check on you, hug you, hold you, give you comfort, 
and won’t expect any sex from you because, well, he can’t get 
it up no way. From him, you get ﬁnancial security. The ugly 
one? He’ll go above and beyond the call of duty to help you 
out: he’ll take the kids to their lessons after school, run you 
down to the grocery store, wash the car on the weekends, 
babysit the cat—whatever you need, he’ll provide it because 
he’s just happy someone as beautiful as you is paying him any 
kind of attention. From him, you get “me time.” He frees you 
up to do all the things you need time to do. And then there’s 
the Mandingo man. You need a big ol’ Mandingo man. You 
know what you gonna get from him. He’s big, he’s not that 
smart, can’t hold a good conversation, got muscles popping out 
from his eyebrows to his pinkie toe and when you see him, you 
know he’s going to put your back out. That’s all you want from 
him, and he makes sure he gives it to you real good. Mind-
blowing sex—that’s what you get from Mandingo. And then 
you need a gay guy—someone you can go shopping with, who 
doesn’t want anything from you but gossip and details about 
what the old man bought you, which errands you sent the ugly 
guy to take care of, and exactly how Mandingo had you doing 
monkey ﬂips for a week. See, the gay guy gives you all the 
conversation you need (smile).
Four guys, supplying each of your needs should  bring you 
happiness. I say should because for women, happiness isn’t guar-
anteed, even once their needs have been met. We fully recog -
nize that you maintain t he right to c hange at an y time t he 
perimeters, conditions, and speciﬁcs of what, exactly, will make 
you happy, and we tr y to adjust accor dingly, and usually can’t.
Now men, by contrast, are very simp le creatures. It rea lly 
doesn’ t take much to make us ha ppy. In fact, there are onl y 
three things that pretty much every man nee ds—su pport, love, 
and “The Cookie.” Three things—that’s it. And I’m here to
tell you that yes, it’s that sim ple. What we nee d never wea kens 
or wavers—hardly ever gets more demanding or harder to
achieve. In fact, I’ d argue that it’s eas y for a woman to give her 
man support, love, and sex because it’s in her makeup—su p-
port an d love are t hings that women dole out innate ly and 
freely. You just ca ll it somet hing e lse: nurturing. An d if you 
love a man enou gh to nurture him, then I’d ar gue you love
him enou gh to be intimate wit h him. So t hose three things 
come natural to you. And this is all your man wants from you. 
Let me break it down.
We have to feel like somebody’s got our back—like we’re 
the king, even i f we’re not. You have to un derstan d that when
we wa lk out t he door, t he entire wor ld is stan ding at t he ready
to beat us down. Black, white, yellow, stri ped, ever y man leavesWh

the house ready to battle. He might have a job where three 
 people can walk by his desk and give him a pink slip at any 
given moment—change his life in the ﬂash of an eye. The guy 
in the position beneath your man’s may be just searching for a 
way to undermine him, so he can get the bigger pay—and he 
doesn’t give a damn about whether what he says and does can 
put your man’s job in jeopardy. Your man could be driving 
down the street minding his own business and get pulled over 
and something could happen that he has no control over, or 
someone may try to come and take what he’s got. In other 
words, a man is constantly on the lookout, sizing up the next 
man, standing at the ready to defend his and all of his gains 
(that would include you).
So when we walk back in our house, we want to be able to 
let our guard down. All we want, really, is to hear you say, 
“Baby, how was your day? Thank you for making it happen for 
us. This family needs you and wants you and is happy to have 
you.” We’ve got to feel like we’re king, even if we don’t act 
kingly. Trust me, the more you make us feel like we’re special, 
the more we’ll give in return. We’ll just try harder. Plain and 
simple. Take a page from my mother: every Sunday morning, 
my daddy cut my hair for church, and when I got out of that 
chair, and lotioned up and put on my suit and my shoes and 
walked into the living room where my mother was waiting for 
me, she would take one look at me and say, “Look at that boy’s 
haircut—boy, you clean!” or “Look at you, boy—you sharp 
when you go to church!” I internalized the message—if I got a 
fresh haircut and I put on a nice suit, my mother would compli-
ment me, and I would walk out of the house with my shoulders 
squared and head held high because my mother said I looked 
good and she was encouraging me to be presentable. And my 
father’s chest was out as far as mine because every Sunday, she 
reminded him that he made it all possible; she kissed and 
thanked him every Sunday.
A man needs that from his woman—he needs her to say, 
“Baby, I can’t tell you how much I appreciate what you do for me 
and the kids.” Those simple words give us the strength to keep 
on doing right by you and the family. From working harder on 
the job, to bringing home that paycheck, to something as simple 
as throwing some meat on the grill on Saturday evenings or fol d-
ing up a load of the laundry, we’ll do it more often if there is 
reward in it. That reward doesn’t cost you one red penny. It 
simply comes from the heart: Thank you, baby. I appreciate you.  
You don’t know how important that is for your man; that little 
bit of encouragement makes him want to do more. You think 
because we’re hard and we don’t want to cuddle that we don’t 
need that encouragement, but we do. And the woman who 
comes along and says, “You so big and strong and you’re every-
thing I need,” well, we’re going to go get some more of that!
rstand that our love is w holly different from a 
woman’s love. A woman’s love is emotiona l, nurturing, heart-
felt—sweet and kind and all encom passing. You can slice a knife 
through it, it’s so t hick. And when she’s in love wit h you, she is 
loyal to you—she can’t see herself with someone else, because
for her, no one e lse will do. That’s a woman’s love.
But for men, love is loyalty. We want you to show your love
to us by being loyal. That means t hat no matter w hat, you’re 
going to stand beside us. We get laid off, we know you’re goin g 
to stay, even i f we’re not drawin g a paycheck. You get aroun d
your gir lfriends, you’re going to say wit h great ent husiasm, 
“That’smyman. I’m loyal toy him.” Idris Elba, Denzel, Usher, or 
the like walks into t he room, mone y dripping from t heir suit 
jacket, ﬂoating on air and glistening and all that? You’re going 
to hold on to our hand a little tighter an d say from t he bottom
of your heart, “I don’t want any of those shiny, rich, ﬁne men
because m y man is t he only one for me!” (We can on ly hope
that’s what you’ll say—smile.)
That’s loyalty—our kind of love. To men, t hey are one an d
the same. T he kind of love you require is beautiful, but our love
isn’t like your love. It’s different, thou gh it’s still love. And a
man’s love is a ver y powerful thing. It’s amazin g love. I f your 
loyalty is real and unimpeachable, that man will kill concrete 
for you. He ain’t going no damn w here.r

. Men. Nee d. Sex. We love it. Ain’t not hin’ on
this planet like it, not hing else we want t hat bad on a continu -
ous basis, nothin g else we sim ply cannot live without. Take ou r 
house, ta ke our job, the ’69 Im pala, our last pair of gators, but
please—puh-leeze—don’t hold out on the cookie. We don’t
care about an ything else; we nee d the coo kie. We nee d to be 
physically engaged with the woman we love, the woman who
is loyal to us an d supports us, an d the way that we do that is by
making love. The emotional stuff—the talking, the cuddling,
the holding hands, and bonding, that’s y’all’s thing. We’ ll do
those things because we know it’s important to you. But p lease
understand: the wa y we men connect is b y havin g sex. Period.
It’s how we plug in, rec harge, and reconnect. I don’t know o f a 
man who doesn’t need this. Ask any guy if sex is important in a
relations hip and the one w ho says no is lying. I just haven’t met 
that guy yet. When you meet him, let’s get him in to the Smit h-
sonian— he’s that special and rare. But t he rest o f us men? We
need sex like we need air.
You got about a good mont h at best wit hout it. An d then
he’s going to get it from somew here else (un less you’re carryin g 
his child). I’m tellin g you: gangs are built on su pport and lo y-
alty; dudes go out an d form gangs built on t hose two t hings 
right there. The only thing missing is sex, and that’s where the
girl gang mem bers come in. It’s t he same t hing with motorc ycler.

clubs, the country club, the Elks, the Masons, frats—the whole 
of a man’s world is built on these three principles. There’s not 
one day of the week that we are not waking up in the pursuit 
of it. Let’s say you’re not a member of Alpha Phi Alpha, Kappa 
Alpha Psi, or you’re an almighty member of Omega Psi Phi, 
and someone who hasn’t pledged their undying support and 
love to frat on a line for at least six weeks—be that person put-
ting on their colors and let them ﬁnd out you haven’t pledged, 
that you didn’t cross over. Do you know what the hell would 
happen if those boys found out you’re not frat? Messing with 
their loyalty—their colors? Man, not nary a day. Be a Crip and 
go to a Blood’s house and see what happens. Try going into that 
country club and you’re not a member. Loyalty. Support. That’s 
what men are made of.
And can’t one of them survive without sex. Oh, he’ll work 
with you if you have an off week—if he loves you, that is. If he 
didn’t care, he wouldn’t bother to try to get your cookie—he’d 
just go on and get it from somewhere else. But if he’s into you, 
and you’re cutting back, rationing it out, you’re not doing what 
you did when you all ﬁrst started dating, he’s going to line up 
someone who will. Please believe me when I tell you this: he 
will tell everybody , “This is my girl right here, ” but mean-
while, he will have another woman lined up and waiting to 
give him what he needs and wants—the cookie.
Don’t get it wrong—we’re not animals. We know things 
change, the baby comes and the doctor says we have to wait six 
weeks, or your monthly is on the way, your hormones are acting 
up and you’re not in the mood. But the excuses can’t go on 
forever. You can play your man short if you want to. No matter 
how much a man loves his wife, his family, his house, his role 
as the man of the house, the one who’s bringing in all the 
money into family account, maybe even putting a little extra 
into yours, if you mess around and start shelling out the cookie 
in crumbs, it’s going to be a problem.
Speaking of my own experience, I recently turned ﬁfty and 
I’m telling you right now, don’t play me short in this area. At 
my age, I’ll work with you for a little longer, because I’m busy, 
I got a company to run, I got a schedule to keep, I’m on the 
road, on the stage, on the radio, writing books, acting, support-
ing my own charity and working with others. I’m on the run. 
And at my age, I can’t afford to mess up—mentally, emotion-
ally, or spiritually. Hell is no longer an option for me. I’m doing 
what I can to get to the Gate, and it could be any day now. If I 
start messing around, I might have a stroke and miss out on my 
homegoing. But the truth is, if I can’t go home and relieve my 
stress, there is a problem. If I’ve talked to the Lord and tried to 
get you motivated to give me some of the cookie and you’re still 
coming up with reasons why you just can’t be intimate with 
me, something is going to change.
And I’m ready to bet things aren’t so different in your house-
hold. You might have been up all night for a week with a sick 
child, gotten up early to get the other onto the school bus before 
you hit the road for that rush-hour commute to work, gone to 
battle with your co-workers and boss for eight hours with noth-
ing but a ﬁfteen-minute break to swallow an inadequate, unsat-
isfying lunch, and then hit the rush-hour trafﬁc back home to 
start your second job—the feeding and care of your kids. There’s 
dinner to be cooked, and homework to be checked, and laun-
dry to be done, and the list goes on. By the time your man 
checks in with you, the last thing on your mind is giving a posi -
tive response to what a friend of mine called “the shoulder ta p.” 
“You know what I’m talking about,” she said. “It’s when you 
ﬁnally drop into the bed exhausted, and you’re halfway through 
your favorite show you watch when you just want to zone out, 
and here he comes, tapping you on your shoulder, asking for 
sex. It’s just annoying.”
What that same friend of mine didn’t know, though, was 
that her husband was tired of the “shoulder tap,” too. In his 
mind, he’d also worked all day—just as hard as her. And though 
he may not have done all the exact things she’d done during the 
course of the evening at home, he, too, put in work around the 
house, and, like her, needed to wind down from his day. She 
liked watching television. He liked to have sex. She was always 
too tired to have sex. He was tired of not having sex. So while 
she unwound to her favorite shows, he unwound out of the 
house—with another woman.
Now, I’m not saying what he did was right. But as a man, I 
can understand the logic behind what he eventually ended up 
doing. And if I were in their bedroom before all of the ugliness 
from his cheating ways went down, I would have given them 
what I’ve found to be some very sage advice: acknowledge the 
ones you love. That means that if a man sees his woman had a 
hard day and she could stand some more help around the house 
to make the evenings go more smoothly, her man needs to step 
up his game. If she cooks, he does the dishes. If she gets the 
kids’ clothes ready for tomorrow, he gets their homework ready 
for tomorrow. If she gets the kids off to bed, he gets his wife off 
in bed by setting the mood—straightening up, running her a 
bath, letting her settle in with a glass of wine, whatever it takes 
to make it clear to her that having sex with the woman he loves 
is not only a release, but an act of love. And she, perhaps, will 
be more willing to reciprocate—not with annoyance, but with 
the sheer giddiness in knowing how it feels to feel wanted.
But understand that no man is going to wine and dine his 
wife every night in order to have sex with her. That’s unreason-
able. Sometimes, he’s just going to want to have you, no frill s—
without being forced to feel like he’s added another “chore” to 
your list of things to do. Every man needs that from his woman. 
Every last one of us.
 T o sum up, we’ve got to have these three things—support, 
loyalty, and sex—from you or we’re going to go. You can shop 
for us, cook dinner every night, and make sure our favorite 
peanut butter is in the cabinet to show us that you’re paying at-
tention and you care. But what we really need from you when 
our day goes bad is those three things. You give me that when 
I come home, and I’ll go back out there and ﬁght this war for 
you. The moment a woman isn’t doing those three things for 
her man, I can promise you he’ll get somebody who will. We 
cannot survive without these things—not for ninety days, we 
can’t.
You may not like what I’m saying, but ask any man about 
these words and whether they’re true, and that man will tell 
you this one simple thing: it’s true. Support. Loyalty. The 
cookie. If you supply these three things, you’ll have on your 
hands a man who will do anything you need and want him to 
do for you—pure and simple.
4
“We Need to Talk,” 
and Other Words That Make 
Men Run for Cover
 We need to talk.”
For a man, few words are as menacing as those 
four—especially when a woman is the one saying 
them and he’s on the receiving end. Those four words can mean 
only two things to men: either we did something wrong or, 
worse, you really literally just want to talk. Now, we understand 
that we’re not the essence of perfection and there are going to be 
times when you’re mad at us and need to let us know it; we get 
that, though we don’t necessarily want to have to concentrate on 
an hourlong angry lecture about how we screwed up. But even 
more? No man wants to sit around gabbing with you like we’re 
one of your girlfriends. Ever. It’s just not in our DNA to lounge 
around, sip coffee, and dab at our eyes with tissue as if we’re in 
an AA meeting or on some psychologist’s couch trying to get 
things off our chest. When men are talking, and especially when 
they’re listening, it’s with purpose.
We don’t vent.
We just want to ﬁx whatever situation is upsetting the balance.
We understand that this frustrates you time and time again, 
because sometimes you want to talk to share and get someone 
else’s take on a situation—you know, put a listening ear on it. 
But seriously? That’s what your girlfriends are for. You lay out 
your problem and she’ll commiserate with you—give you all 
kinds of “yeah, girls” and “I know that’s right,” and nod and 
agree and tell you stories about how the same thing happened 
to her. She’ll even go on to give you concrete examples of every  
other time something like this has happened to other women 
throughout the history of the world, and, hours later, you all 
will get up from the couch, having solved nothing but feeling 
so much better. Consider Exhibit A:
 “I walked into work today and before I could get 
to my desk, I saw Tanya walking over to the coffee 
machine and wouldn’t you know that heiffa had on 
the same shirt as me?”
 “You better stop it. Which one?”
 “The blue one—you know, the one with the 
orange ﬂower print? I got it from that store across 
town? On sale?”
 “You mean the one you found on the 
$29.99 rack in the back? The same day I found those 
shoes at the store just down the street?”
 “That’s the one! I wore that shirt to work a few 
weeks ago and she complimented me on it and next 
thing I know, she ran to the store and bought my 
shirt and is wearing it to work! Can you believe it? 
Do you know how that made me feel?”
 “Aw, hell to the nah. Are you serious? 
That’s horrible. She’s got some nerve . . .”
For sure, this conversation could go on for hours, morphing 
into all kinds of side conversations that have absolutely nothin g 
to do with the issue at hand: that some woman was wearing the 
same blouse as you on the same day in the same ofﬁce.
With a man, exactly ten seconds into the conversation, he’d 
arrive at The Fix. I present to you, Exhibit B:
 “I walked into work today and before I could get 
to my desk, I saw Tanya walking over to the coffee 
machine and wouldn’t you know that heiffa had on 
the same shirt as me?”
 “Really? Don’t wear it anymore.”
End of conversation. It’s that simple for us. In this particular 
instance, and many more examples such as this, we can’t get more 
worked up than that. How you felt at work while you had to sit 
there with this other woman on the other side of the room with 
the same blouse on is irrelevant to us. As far as we’re concerned, 
the problem has already been ﬁxed—you came home. You’re 
not looking at the woman in the identical blouse anymore. And 
if you don’t wear that particular blouse to the ofﬁce again, you 
won’t have to deal with that particular problem again. In our 
mind, problem solved—no more talking.
All of this is to say that we men aren’t in the talking busi-
ness; we’re in the ﬁx-it business. From the moment we come 
out of the womb, we’re taught to protect, profess, and provide. 
Communicating, nurturing, listening to problems, and trying 
to understand them without any obligation to ﬁx them is simpl y 
not what boys are raised to do. We don’t let them cry, we don’t 
ask them how they feel about anything, we don’t encourage 
them to express themselves in any meaningful way beyond 
showing how “manly” they are. Let a little boy fall off his bike 
and scrape his knee—see how fast everyone tells him to get up 
and shake it off and stop all that doggone crying. “Be a man,” 
we demand. There’s no discussion about how he felt when he 
hit the ground—nobody’s asking him to talk about whether 
he’s too scared to get back on the bike and try again. Our auto-
matic response is to tell him to get over it, get back on the bike, 
and ﬁgure out how to ride it so he doesn’t fall again.
Now that he’s grown and in a relationship, you expect that 
same boy who was told to keep quiet and keep it moving to be 
a man who can sit and listen and communicate and nurture? 
I’m telling you now: your expectations are off. Women have 
different moods, and ideas in their head, and you all expect us 
to fall in line, and if we don’ t, it’ s a problem—you’ re tellin g 
your girlfriends, “He won’t talk to me,” and “I can’t get him to 
open up.” But opening up is not what we do. Profess, provide, 
and protect—all our lives, that’s what we men have been taught 
and encouraged to do. This, we’ve been told, is how a man 
shows his love. And The Fix falls ﬁrmly into the “provide” 
category. For sure, provision isn’t just about money; for us, pro-
viding also is about righting what’ s wrong, and ﬁguring out 
what’s going to keep everybody happy. Because any man with 
sense knows that when mama’s happy, we’re all going to be 
happy. And when you’re happy, there is a great return for us. So 
we provide and ﬁx.
I’m telling you right now: if you go to your man with a situ-
ation that’s ﬁxable and he doesn’t try to ﬁx it, he is not your 
man—he is not in love with you. Go ahead, I dare you to try it 
for yourself. When your man comes over, tell him, “You know, 
I just can’t stand this kitchen this way. The color just throws me 
all off, the cabinets are all wrong, they don’t go with the stove 
and I can’t get my mind right in here when I’m trying to cook.” 
If he’s all the way in it with you, he will say, without hesitat ion, 
“What color you want this kitchen to be, baby?” Tell him 
“pink,” and see if by next Saturday the whole kitchen isn’t 
painted pink, cabinets and all. He will see your distress, under-
stand that if you don’t like the cabinets and the walls and the 
way the stove functions, you’re going to walk into that kitchen 
with your mouth poked out—phoning in the home-cooked 
meals because you just can’t hook up the steaks and baked po-
tatoes like you want to in a kitchen you can’t stand. And we 
deﬁnitely don’t want that, so to the hardware store we will go. 
Even if we don’t have money for a complete remodel, we’ll go 
and ﬁnd you some hardware for the cabinets, maybe some new 
handles, and some sandpaper—lots of sandpaper—to get that 
color you can’t stand off your cabinets, so that we can reﬁnish 
them exactly the way you want them to be ﬁnished. A man 
who really loves you can’t wait to do this for you, because in the 
back of his mind, he can envision you with a smile on your 
face, setting his place at the head of the table, and serving up a 
ﬁne meal in the new kitchen he ﬁxed just for you. (Oh, make 
no mistake about it: we want to see you happy, but it’s also all 
about the return, ladies. Please understand and respect the 
return.)
Of course, we operate under the assumption that The Fix 
isn’t always going to be on point. We stay off balance because 
even though we’re responding in a way that we believe is logi-
cal, our women will inevitably respond emotionally—which 
always throws a monkey wrench right into the middle of what 
we’re trying to accomplish. Most of the time, it feels to us that 
your response is determined not wholly by what is rational, b ut 
mostly by how you’re feeling that particular day, at that particu-
lar moment. A perfect example: your man can lick you on the 
same breast with the same amount of moisture in the same exact  
position that had you hollering and screaming last night, and 
this evening, you will look at him and say , with conviction, 
“What are you doing? I don’t want that.” And now he’s all con-
fused because, hey, if you lick him on that spot and he liked it 
yesterday, he’s going to like it today and tomorrow and the day 
after that, too. But you, not so much. What you like and how 
you like it seemingly shifts from day to day, sometimes even 
moment to moment. And that is not logical to us—we can’t 
ﬁgure it out, ever. If we get it right, great. But sometimes, we’re 
just going to get it wrong. A lot of times, the more inexperi-
enced of us men are going to completely screw it up. For ex-
ample, consider a woman who walks into the room in a visible 
huff; a guy who’s young and not too smart in this relationship 
business may ask his lady what’s wrong, and she may say, “noth-
ing.” That fool will be the one to say, “Okay, cool.” He will 
also be the one who gets laid out with the, “Dammit—you saw 
me tripping and you’re just going to walk off without seeing 
about me?” Yup, that guy is going to have a lot of ﬁxing to 
do.
But the more experienced man—the one who can read his 
lady’s moods and tell when something is wrong—is going to 
ask her what’s up, and no matter how many times she says, 
“nothing,” he’s going to ask again and again until she starts 
coming clean and opens up, though, in his heart of hearts, he 
will be hoping to God there’s really nothing wrong, and if there 
is something wrong, he will be able to just ﬁx it because he 
doesn’t want to see her pout. Even when he thinks she is done 
talking, he’ll push her until the issue is resolved because he can’t 
leave it at, “Wow, sorry that happened.” He will immediately 
launch into The Fix.
This is not to say you’ll never have a conversation with your 
man that lasts longer than two minutes. We understand that 
sometimes we’re going to have to give a little more in terms of 
communicating with you—that every now and then we’re 
going to have to spill our guts and reveal what’s going on in our 
heads. We also know that you may just want to lie in our arms 
and cuddle and talk it out with absolutely no resolution. We are 
capable of doing this, too. It’s not easy. But it can be done. We 
know that sitting and listening and even participating in a long 
conversation about your feelings is necessary and inevitable. But 
don’t be surprised if those conversations are few and far be-
tween. Detailed conversation is what you have with your girl-
friends. Men just want to hear the problem and then ﬁx it. It’s 
about maintaining this balance—the two of you understanding 
exactly what each other requires to be innately happy, and then 
trying to provide at least some of that so that both mates feel 
like they’re in this relationship with the other. For men, that 
means that every once in a while, they may have to sit and be 
still and just listen. For women, it would go a long way if they 
respected the encryption of manhood—that we’re too focused 
on who we are, what we do, and how much we make to spend 
a whole lot of time sitting around pondering things that can’t be 
ﬁxed.
Of course, it would go a long way if women stopped open-
ing the conversation with “we need to talk.” The moment you 
say that, our defenses go up, the repair tools come out, the 
sweat starts rolling, and we’re sprinting through the events of 
the past weeks, trying to ﬁgure out what we did wrong, when 
we did it, and how we’re going to ﬁx it so that we’re not in 
trouble anymore.
In fact, I think it’s a good idea that, if you just want to vent, 
you start the conversation with something simple, like, “Honey, 
look, nothing is really wrong—I just want to tell somebody 
something.” That’s a great opening line; it allows us to relax, 
take our foot down from the witness stand, put away our “ﬁx 
it” tools, and actually sit and listen to what you have to say.

Why Men Do
What  They DoPART TWO

5
First Things First
 We were doing the Steve Harvey Morning Show  live by 
remote in Detroit, and a woman came up to the 
podium to say hello to me and the crew—a really 
attractive girl, nicely dressed, with beautiful dark skin, pretty 
white teeth, gorgeous body, really put together all around. And 
when she started talking, she really threw me because I could 
hear in her voice that she was mature, but she just didn’t look 
like she sounded. So I asked the lady how old she was; she said 
she was forty-two. Blew me away. I didn’t think she was a day 
older than thirty. Then I asked her how many kids she had. 
“Five,” she said, smiling from ear to ear. “I’ve got three of my 
own, and I adopted two.”
Now I’m sitting here thinking, wow—that’s really slick. 
She’s over age forty, she’s taking care of not only the kids she 
gave birth to, but two more she took in out of the kindness and 
generosity of her heart, and she looks years younger than she 
really is—she’s really got it going on. Be clear: I wasn’t about to 
do anything with this information because guess what? I’m a 
happily married man—emphasis on happily. But some years 
ago, that conversation would have gone down a wholly differ-
ent way, and it would not have involved me asking her anything 
about her kids, where she works, how she’s living—none of 
that.
But a guy who was all in her space while we continued 
doing our show—that’s another story. He clearly had plans for 
this lady. You could tell just by the way he was leaning into her, 
hanging on her every word. Oh, he was talking to her like 
there weren’t hundreds of  people surrounding them—like my 
cohost and I weren’t in the middle of a show. I knew what he 
was trying to get to. But clearly, she had no clue.
In front of everyone during a commercial break, I asked her, 
“What does he want?”
She laughed and gave me a confused look. “Nothing,” she 
giggled. “W e’ re just making small talk. ” Mind you, the guy 
trying to talk to her isn’t saying a word. He knows that I know. 
And after a few more commercial breaks, and a lot more of his 
obvious moves, I ﬁnally told her he was looking for much more 
than a simple conversation.
“He wants something from you,” I said. “I can prove it to 
you.”
Now the crowd, full of mostly women, is goading me on. 
“Here’s the deal,” I said. “Turn around right now, look in his 
face, and do not take your eyes off his eyes. Now tell him how 
many kids you got and watch his reaction.”
The man seemed calm until she got to the word ﬁve. He 
reeled back like a spooked horse; his whole facial structure 
changed, and even though he covered his mouth, he couldn’t 
keep his surprised, “Ooh,” from escaping his lips.
He couldn’t get away from her fast enough. The next break, 
he was down on the other end of the venue—ﬁfty feet away, in 
some other woman’s face. See, he wanted something from her, 
but that something didn’t include ﬁve kids. He had a good job, 
he appeared intelligent. He had told me he was making good 
money; clearly, however, he couldn’t foresee his money split 
those many ways. When he was ﬂirting with this woman, all he 
envisioned was he and her getting down to it, no strings 
attached.
My cohost just laughed and laughed and asked me how I 
knew all of this. It’s easy: when a man approaches you, he has a 
plan. And the main plan is to sleep with you, or to ﬁnd out 
what it takes to sleep with you.
H e r e ’ s  a  g e n e r a l i z a t i o n  b u t  i n  m y  e x p e r i e n c e ,  i t ’ s  t r u e .  
Women love to sit and talk for no apparent reason but to talk, 
but we men, we’re just not cut out to chitchat for the sake of 
chitchat—we don’t have time for it. We men are very simple 
 people: if we like what we see, we’re coming over there. If we 
don’t want anything from you, we’re not coming over there. 
Period. Please highlight this part right here so you can always 
remind yourself the next time a man steps to you: a man always 
wants something. Always. And when it comes to women, that 
plan is always to ﬁnd out two things: (1) if you’re willing to 
sleep with him, and (2) if you are, how much it will cost to get 
you to sleep with him.
That’s his mission in the club.
That’s his charge in the lunchroom at the ofﬁce.
That’s what he’s up to when he skips past all those seats at 
the church and sits down in the pew right next to you.
If a man sees you and asks you how you’re doing, what do 
you think he came over there for? He didn’t come over to learn 
anything from you, to ﬁnd out about your interests and likes 
and wants. That’s what women do when they’re interested in 
getting to know someone. For a man, it’s really less compli-
cated: he liked what he saw from across the room and now he’s 
going to go over there and get it. He doesn’t care anything 
about your personality or what you do for a living; your friends 
mean nothing to him, and whether you know Jesus is irrele-
vant. He just wants to know if he might be able to sleep with 
you, and he’s talking to you to determine exactly how much he 
has to invest to get what he wants.
When I say, “invest,” I’m not talking solely about monetary 
values; I’m talking about your values—your requirements. He’s 
trying to see if your “price” is too high, if it’s affordable, if he 
can get it on credit, whether he can get it tonight. If you 
don’t lay out any requirements, then you’re free—game on. He 
knows he can get you to the bed with minimal effort. But if 
you tell him up front you have requirements—that you need his 
time, his respect, his attention—then he knows you’re expen-
sive, that he’s going to need to put in work to get the cookie. 
For some men, that cost may be too high—they’re just looking 
for a good time and have no interest in “investing” time and re-
spect and a commitment. One man may assess right away, “Man, 
I got to go by there two or three times a week, gas is ﬁve dollars 
a gallon, I got this other woman I’m hollering at, I’m going to 
have to call her and all of that. No, that price is out of my range.” 
For another man, your sticker price may be affordable.
This is useful information to you because now you know 
when a man approaches you, you can cut through the riffraff, 
lay down your requirements (which I’ll talk about later), and 
determine right away whether he’s willing to pay for what it is 
he’s looking for. Okay, so ladies: it’s no secret now—and you 
can act accordingly. When you’re not aware that all men have 
plans, you’re not placing requirements on him, and if you’re not 
setting any ground rules, then you’re essentially telling him that 
you’re open for his rules. You’ve established that you don’t care 
how often he calls, when he comes by, how often you all talk, 
and whether he opens your door; this means that he’ll call you 
when he gets ready, he won’t be opening any of your doors, and 
even though you asked him to be there at seven, he won’t show 
up until eight—all because you didn’t (a) acknowledge that a 
man always has a plan and (b) act accordingly.
This is precisely what was on my father-in-law’s mind when 
one of my daughters brought home her alleged “boyfriend” to 
the house for a family dinner. You should know that my father-
in-law is one of the smartest men I ever met in my life—
he’s a man I look up to, and I look up to very few men. The 
things that come out of his mouth are usually, if not always, on 
point and make me think. The same was true this particular 
evening when he lined up this boy on the living room couch 
and asked him plain as day, “So, what’s your plan with my 
granddaughter?”
The young man, about thirty, asked very simply, “What do 
you mean by that?”
“I mean just what I asked,” my father-in-law said. “What is 
your plan?”
“I don’t have no plan,” he said.
“Then what are you doing?” my father-in-law asked.
“I’m just trying to get to know her,” he insisted.
“But what’s your plan? Where is this going?” my father-in-
law snapped back.
Finally, under the pressure of the questioning, the squared 
shoulders, and two straight-faced black men making it clear we 
know the game, the boy ﬁnally broke down and said those four 
fateful words: “We’re just kicking it.”
My father-in-law sat there and stared at him for a minute, 
satisﬁed, ﬁnally, that he’d gotten to the bottom of it. He tasted 
blood. “Okay, then—cool,” my father-in-law said quietly. 
“Let’s share that with her, that you’re just ‘kicking it.’ Let’s see 
how she feels being the kicked one. Let’s take that back to 
her.”
She looked so crazy when, a few minutes later, we let her 
know about her man’s plans—that they’re just “kicking it.” Be-
cause she knows from our constant talks and updates and ses-
sions about men that when it comes to relationships, you’re 
either being kicked or you’re potential long-term material. It 
can’t be both. Clearly, he had a plan that was different from 
what she wanted.
Luckily my daughter had her granddad and me to help her 
decipher her man’s plan. But not every woman has a father 
ﬁgure around to hip her to the game. Now, when that man 
comes smiling all up in your face and talking like he’s really 
into you, act like you know. Because now, you do: he wants to 
sleep with you.
What’s your price?
If you let him know up front, he will let you know up front if 
it’s too high a price for him to pay. And then you can move on.

6
Sports Fish vs. Keepers
Anyone who really knows me knows about my pas-
sion for ﬁshing. I’ve always loved the tranquil mo-
ments that come with the sport—sitting on the bank 
or the deck of a boat, out on the open water. There is no greater 
peace. But I also crave the sudden explosion of adrenaline that 
comes when I feel a ﬁsh on the other end of my line; you can’t 
imagine the thrill that comes when I have to use every bit of 
my might and mind to see if I can keep this ﬁsh hooked, reel it 
in, and get it in the boat.
And then comes the hard part—deciding whether to keep 
the ﬁsh or throw it back. So in addition to ﬁshing, hooking 
them, and reeling them in, I get another rush when I’m forced 
to look at them, see how they feel, and evaluate whether they 
make it on my stringer. And trust me: a ﬁsh has to be really 
special to make it onto my stringer. Otherwise, it gets tosse d 
back into the water, so I can ﬁsh some more.
A man ﬁshes for two reasons: he’s either sport ﬁshing or ﬁshing 
to eat, which means he’s either going to try to catch the biggest 
ﬁsh he can, take a picture of it, admire it with his buddies and toss 
it back to sea, or he’s going to take that ﬁsh on home, scale it, ﬁllet 
it, toss it in some cornmeal, fry it up, and put it on his plate. This, 
I think, is a great analogy for how men seek out women.
See, men are, by nature, hunters, and women have been put 
in the position of being the prey. Think about it: it used to be 
that a man “picked” a wife, a man “asked” a woman to dinner, 
a man had to get “permission” from a woman’s father to have 
her hand in marriage, and even, in some cases, to date her. We 
pursued—in fact, we’ve been taught all our lives that it was not 
only a good thing to chase women, but natural. Women have 
bought into this for years, too; how many times have you or 
one of your girls said, “I like it when a man pursues me,” or “I 
need him to romance me and give me ﬂowers and make me feel 
like I’m wanted”? Flowers, jewelry, phone calls, dates, sweet 
talk—these are all the weapons in our hunting arsenal when 
we’re coming for you.
But the question always remains: once we hook you, what 
will we do with you? Taking a cue from my love of ﬁshing, my 
philosophy is that men will treat women like one of these two 
things: a sports ﬁsh or a keeper. How we meet, how the con-
versation goes, how the relationship develops, and the demands 
you make on a man will all determine whether you’ll be treated 
like a sports ﬁsh—a throwback—or a keeper, the kind of 
woman a man can envision settling down with. And the way 
we separate the two is very simple, as I explain next.
 A
Doesn’t have any rules, requirements, respect for herself, or 
guidelines, and we men can pick up her scent a mile away. She’s 
the party girl who takes a sip of her Long Island iced tea or a 
shot of her Patrón, then announces to her suitor that she just 
wants to “date and see how it goes,” and she’s the conservatively 
dressed woman at the ofﬁce who is a master at networking, but 
clueless about how to approach men. She has no plans for any 
ongoing relationships, is not expecting anything in particular 
from a man, and sets absolutely not nary one condition or re-
striction on anyone standing before her—she makes it very clear 
that she’s just along for whatever is getting ready to happen. For 
sure, as soon as she lets a man know through words and action 
that he can treat her just any old kind of way, he will do just 
that. Men will stand in line to sign up for that, believe me.
 A
Never gives in easily, and the standards/requirements start 
the moment you open your mouth. See, she understands her 
power and wields it like a samurai sword. She commands—not 
demands—respect, just by the way she carries herself. You can 
walk up to her and give her your best game, and while she may 
be impressed by what you say, that’s no guarantee that she’s 
going to let the conversation go any further, much less give y ou 
her phone number and agree to give you some of her valuable 
time. Men automatically know from the moment she opens her 
mouth that if they want her, they’ll have to get in line with her 
standards and requirements, or keep it moving because she’s 
done with the games and isn’t interested in playing. But she will 
also send all the signals that she is capable of being loyal to a 
man and taking good care of him, appreciative of what he’ s 
bringing to the relationship, and ready for love—true, long-
lasting love.
 N ewsﬂash: it’s not the guy who determines whether 
you’re a sports ﬁsh or a keeper—it’s you. (Don’t hate the player, 
hate the game.) When a man approaches you, you’re the one 
with total control over the situation—whether he can talk to 
you, buy you a drink, dance with you, get your number, take 
you home, see you again, all of that. We certainly want these 
things from you; that’s why we talked to you in the ﬁrst place. 
But it’s you who decides if you’re going to give us any of the 
things we want, and how, exactly, we’re going to get them. 
Where you stand in our eyes is dictated by your control over the 
situation. Every word you say, every move you make, every 
signal you give to a man will help him determine whether he 
should try to play you, be straight with you, or move on to the 
next woman to do a little more sport ﬁshing.
I like to think that the way you play this situation is much 
like how you climb the ladder at work. Think about it: dating 
is a lot like a business; the best way to become successful is to 
master and control things you have control over. When I ﬁrst 
started in show business, I knew I wanted to be a top-ﬂight 
comedian. But because the club owners didn’t know me well, 
all I could get was a gig as the opening act—the ﬁrst guy up, 
ﬁfteen minutes to do my thing, and then off the stage I went. 
Still, I knew that if I was on my game—showed up on time, 
networked, and, most important, gave thought-provoking, 
funny performances that made the audiences and the club 
owners remember me—I could get the ultimate job as the 
headliner, the comedian who gets his name on the marquee and 
forty-ﬁve minutes to make  people scream with laughter. I con-
trolled my ﬁfteen minutes by making  people laugh hard enough 
to remember me, and then parlayed it into gigs as the “fea-
tured” comedian, the performer who gets thirty minutes on 
the stage. And then I did the same thing with my thirty min-
utes onstage, making  people laugh so hard that club owners 
didn’t have any other choice but to make me the featured act.
See? My success in getting to be one of the Kings of Comedy 
was based on my desire and ability to control my product—my 
performance—which ultimately made me exactly who I wanted 
to be. And doing that got me exactly what I wanted—success. 
The same applies to a woman who wants to be a “keeper” rather 
than a sports ﬁsh. You control what you can control—your image, 
the way you conduct yourself, the way you let men talk to and 
approach you—and use that to get the relationship you want.
Let me bring it home for you: imagine you’re in the health 
club, and you’re on the stair climber, in your tight red athletic 
bra and matching form-ﬁtting spandex gym pants, glistening 
and dewy with sweat, getting your workout on, looking really 
ﬁt and sexy. A good-looking guy comes in—he’s handsome, ﬁt, 
no rings on his ﬁngers. And when he walks up to the treadmill 
next to where you’re working out, the chemistry between the 
two of you is electric; he smiles, you smile back; you move to 
another machine, he moves to one not too far from you; he 
glances at you, you glance back. And when the two of you are 
ﬁnished working out, he goes all out—comes up to you and 
breaks the ice.
“Looked like you had a good workout,” he might say, looking 
you in your eyes, and then letting his gaze linger somewhere around 
your hips. “A woman who takes good care of herself. Nice.”
How you respond—the way you control this exchange—
will mean all the difference between whether he considers you 
a throwback or a keeper. Say something akin to “You know, a 
girl’s gotta look hot,” and then twirl around so he can get a 
better view, and that man is going to do a mental calculation of 
just how fast he can get you into the bed, and whether he can 
suddenly switch his workout time so he doesn’t have to see you 
again after he hits it. A man will determine just from those 
seven words and that tiny action that you’re a woman who can 
be easily had—someone who’s out for a good time and is get-
ting herself in shape solely to keep her body looking right so 
that guys can look at it and really enjoy it. I assure you, the next 
few sentences out of his mouth likely will involve some serious 
attempts to reel you in, and, if you bite, he’ll get you hook, line, 
and sinker. And then he’ll keep it moving.
But respond to him by saying something like “Thanks, my 
health is important to me and working out is a great way to keep 
in shape,” and he knows that he’s going to have to dig a little 
deeper to ﬁnd out more about you. This is no guarantee that he 
will think you’re a keeper—you’ll have to do a bit more talking 
than that simple line—but at the very least, he won’t immediately 
peg you as a throwback. Your comments may lead him to talk 
about why he works out, which could lead to a meaningful con-
versation about a mutual interest you both have for staying in 
shape. And that could lead to him asking more questions, for 
which a keeper will have plenty of answers—laced, of course, with 
enough requirements to let this man know that you’re a keeper, 
someone who is looking for a man who will stick around.
Now, revealing that you’re a keeper is no guarantee that this 
guy won’t just walk away. Some men really are just sport ﬁshing 
and have no intention of doing anything more than throwing 
back the women they bed. If this is the case with this man, then 
let him walk—what do you care? He’s not the guy you’re looking 
for. I know that you and your girls have been told for years on 
end that you just don’t pass up any opportunities when a man 
walks your way—he could be The One. But I’m here to tell you 
that this philosophy is just plain dumb. Women are smart—you 
all can tell when your friends are lying, you know when your 
kids are up to no good, co-workers can’t get anything past you at 
the job. You’re quick to let each one of them know that you’re 
not stupid, that you see them coming a mile away, and you’re not 
going to let them play that game with you. But when it comes to 
your relationships with the opposite sex, all of that goes out the 
window; you relinquish your power and lose all control over the 
situation—cede it to any old man who looks at you twice. Just 
because he happened to look at you twice.
All I’m telling you to do is be smart about it. Know that if 
this man isn’t looking for a serious relationship, you’re not going 
to change his mind just because you two are going out on dates 
and being intimate. You could be the most perfect woman on 
the Lord’s green earth—you’re capable of interesting conversa-
tion, you cook a mean breakfast, you hand out backrubs like 
sandwiches, you’re independent (which means, to him, that 
you’re not going to be in his pockets)—but if he’s not ready for 
a serious relationship, he’s going to treat you like a sports ﬁsh. 
A perfect example of this is in this “Strawberry Letter”—these 
are letters the Steve Harvey Morning Show  receives from its 
listeners— sent in by a woman who clearly was just starting to 
realize she was nothing more than a plaything:
I have been seeing this man for six months and every-
thing seemed cool until January of this year. We’ve 
gone out and visited each other’s homes, but all of a 
sudden, he’s stopped calling and when I call him, he 
seems excited, but then he is very short with me. He 
plans trips and cancels them. And when I ask him if we 
should cut off all communication, he says “no.” But he 
doesn’t act like he wants to be bothered. I don’t know 
what happened, and I still like him, but it just bothers 
me to know that something could be on his mind that 
he is not sharing with me or maybe he has found a 
woman and wants to keep me in his back pocket.
He’s sport ﬁshing, and in her heart, she knows this. But she’s 
still trying to hang in there and see if he’s going to do right by 
her. Any woman in this situation should just leave that guy 
alone. Instead of investing all this time and energy in a man 
who can’t and won’t live up to your expectations, let that guy 
walk. And then when the next man comes along, take control 
and let him know your ground rules up front (see my chapter 
“Men Respect Standards—Get Some”): “I don’t take phone 
calls after 10 P.M., because my kids are asleep and I’m getting 
my rest”; “I appreciate a man who shows up when he says he’s 
going to show up and calls when he’s going to be late”; and “I 
don’t have sex with anyone until I’m sure that we are in a seri-
ous, committed relationship—no casual sex for me” are all ac-
ceptable ground rules for any man coming at you. If those 
ground rules are too much for him, he’s going to walk away 
because he’s sport ﬁshing.
If, however, he has something going for himself, and he 
knows that in order to complete his life he needs a woman who 
has something going for herself, he’s going to stick around and 
keep the conversation going. That’s the man who is willing to 
put in work—who knows that he’s not going to just romance 
you, get what he wants, and walk away. That guy right there? 
He’s your man. He’s ﬁshing for a keeper, and after he’s proven 
himself worthy of your time, then you can let him take you on 
home, ﬁllet you, put some cornmeal on you, fry you up, and 
serve you up on a delicious plate.
Need more examples of differences between sports ﬁsh and 
keepers? Read on:
 A woman who commands respect is a keeper; a 
woman who lets men get away with disrespecting her 
is a throwback.
 A woman who is dressed appropriately—has her 
goodies reasonably covered, but is still sexy, is a 
keeper; a woman who is scantily clad and dripping sex 
is a throwback.
 A woman who won’t let you feel all over her body 
while you’re dancing is a keeper; a woman who drops 
it like it’s hot and puts on a dance ﬂoor performance 
that would make video vixen Karrine Steffans blush is 
a throwback.
 A woman who takes a man’s number but doesn’t give 
him her own is a keeper; a woman who hands out her 
home, work, and cell phone numbers and e-mail and 
home addresses to a man who’s done nothing more 
than buy her a drink and ask how he can reach her is 
a throwback.
 A woman who can hold a respectful, respectable 
conversation with a man and his mother is a keeper; a 
woman who shudders at the prospect of having to talk 
to the matriarch of a man’s family is a throwback.
 A woman who can adapt to any situation thrown at 
her—she can hold her own at the PTA meeting, in 
the boardroom, in a restaurant, at a sporting event— 
is a keeper; a woman who can’t put together a 
coherent sentence or makes it clear she has no interest 
in doing so is a throwback.
 A woman who knows she wants to be married and 
raise a family and lets a man know this up front 
is a keeper; a woman who doesn’t have a plan for 
her relationship life beyond next weekend is a 
throwback.
 A woman whom we can introduce to our friends and 
family is a keeper; a woman we don’t even bother 
introducing to our friends or family is a throwback.
 A woman who smiles and takes care of herself and is 
generally happy with her life is a keeper; a woman 
who doesn’t take care of herself and is sour all the 
time, has an attitude wider than all the ocean, and 
doesn’t hesitate to lay somebody out for the slightest 
transgression is a throwback.
 A woman who shows her appreciation for all that you 
do for her is a keeper; a woman who acts like nothing 
you do can make her happy is a throwback.
 A woman who is loyal is a keeper; a woman who 
always has her eye out for the next best thing is a 
throwback.
 A woman who understands that a man validates his 
manhood by who he is, what he does, and how much 
he makes, and who knows how to ﬁnesse her 
relationship so that her man feels like he’s handling 
his business is a keeper; a woman who wields her 
paycheck and inﬂuence like a sword and belittles his 
career and ﬁnancial contributions is a throwback.
 H
 If his conversation with you is extremely superﬁcial, 
and never seems to graduate beyond the surface, he’s 
sport ﬁshing; if he genuinely seems interested in your 
needs, life, desires, and future, then he’s looking for a 
keeper.
 If he laughs off your requirements and standards, then 
he’s sport ﬁshing; if he seems willing to abide by your 
rules, and actually follows through on them, then he’s 
looking for a keeper.
 If he takes your phone number but waits longer than 
twenty-four hours to call, he’s sport ﬁshing; if he calls 
you right away, he’s showing that he’s genuinely 
interested in you, and is most likely looking for a 
keeper.
 If he takes you out on a date and lets you pay, or only 
kicks in his portion of the bill, he’s sport ﬁshing; if he 
pays the bill, he’s showing that he’s willing to provide 
for you, which means he’s likely looking for a keeper.
 If he tells you he’s going to be somewhere at a certain 
time, and he consistently shows up late without so 
much as the courtesy of a phone call, he’s probably 
sport ﬁshing; if he shows up when he’s supposed to, 
he’s looking for a keeper.
 If you never meet his friends, family, co-workers,  
or other  people who are important to him, he’s sport 
ﬁshing; if he introduces you to his  people, he might 
be looking for a keeper.
 If he keeps offering up excuses for why he can’t 
meet your friends and family, he’s sport ﬁshing; if he 
agrees to go to the family barbecue or a social event 
where he will be introduced to family, friends, and 
co-workers, he might consider you a keeper.
 If he cringes at the mere mention of children, he’s 
sport ﬁshing; if he’s willing to meet your kids and 
shows up with gifts and can relate to them in a way 
that makes them comfortable with him, then he 
might consider you and your kids keepers.
 If he does not have himself together ﬁnancially, 
emotionally, and spiritually, he may be sport ﬁshing; 
if he is capable of providing and protecting his 
potential family the way a real man should, then he 
might be searching for a keeper.
 If he lobbies for an “open” relationship and says he’s 
cool with you seeing other  people, then he’s sport 
ﬁshing; if he wants your relationship to be exclusive 
and he agrees to date only you, he considers you a 
keeper.

7
Mama’s Boys
 Every day on the  Steve Harvey Morning Show , my cohost 
Shirley and I have a really popular segment called 
“Strawberry Letter 23, ” during which we invite our 
listeners to let us help them solve their problems. We get all 
kinds of e-mails and letters from  people desperate for advice on 
how to handle wild kids, overly demanding bosses, cheating 
boyfriends, out-of-control baby’s mommas, money-grubbing 
family members, horrible friendships—you name it, we hear 
about it. Some of the questions are extremely sad, some of them 
are so surprising they make you want to clutch your chest, and 
some of them just make you shake your head and wonder how 
the person asking for advice made it through. The  people who 
write those letters aren’t doing it in a vacuum; for every prob-
lem addressed in “Strawberry Letter 23,” there are thousands 
of listeners out there dealing with the same drama in their own 
lives. We give our opinions on the situation, and some sound 
suggestions for how they can get out of the mess they’re in with 
the hope that the advice we’re passing on helps not only the 
person who wrote us, but the legions of fans also looking for 
answers.
A lot of the “Strawberry Letters” touch me, but one that 
stood out to me recently was from a woman who wrote an at-
tention getter in the subject line: Did I Marry a Man or a Boy? 
She went on to say that she’s a thirty-ﬁve-year-old woman who 
is married to a thirty-year-old man she’d dated for ten years 
before they got married about six months ago. She claimed that 
although their relationship is great, his “controlling” mother is 
driving her crazy. Here’s some of what she wrote:
She controls my husband like he is a little child. She 
calls on him to do everything. She calls my house late 
at night and I can hear her through the phone, scream-
ing at him about something that she may not have 
agreed on. She calls on him for money, to paint her 
house, to pick her up from the movies, to cook for spe-
cial occasions, and even wash her clothes. What prompted 
me to write this letter is the fact that it is now 10:42 
P.M., and I am home alone because my husband was just 
called by his mother to come to her house to help bake 
cakes for a fund-raiser tomorrow. I had plans to spend 
time with my husband tonight, but once again, his 
mother got in the way. Don’t get me wrong: I love the 
fact that he respects and helps his mother, but some-
times I feel left out. My kids and I are often put on the 
back burner because he is always doing something for his 
mother. All these years I have kept my thoughts about 
this to myself, but I don’t know how much more I can 
tak e . . . his moth er is alwa ys taking a wa y from o ur 
family. I sometimes feel like I didn’t marry a man . . .  
I need him to be a man and take control.
Now I sympathize for “Did I Marry a Man or a Boy?” I hear 
from all too many women who face the same problem: their 
men are excessively attached to their mothers at an age where 
you expect the sons to be totally independent—it’s a bond that 
allows the mothers of these men to exert all kinds of control 
over their lives, usually to the detriment of romantic relation-
ships. The mother says, “Jump,” the son asks, “How high and 
when do you need me to be back?” and the girlfriend/wife rolls 
her eyes and sits in the corner with her mouth poked out, won-
dering (a) why this grown man just can’t ﬁx his mouth to say 
no every once in a while, (b) why this woman holds so much 
power over her man, and (c) what kind of tool can she buy/
rent/borrow/invent to detach the two of them so that she and 
her man can get back to the business of building a life together. 
No matter what they say, no matter what they do, no matter how 
many different ways they slice it, women like “Did I Marry a 
Man or a Boy?” feel like they just can’t compete with The Other 
Woman—the mother. Those same women will toss up more 
motives than a DA to explain why their man proudly answers to 
the mama’s boy title: his mother refuses to cut the umbilical cord 
and let him be a man; his mother doesn’t think there’s a woman 
alive good enough for him; his mother has something against his 
signiﬁcant other; he doesn’t want to grow up; he jumps through 
hoops for his mother because she spoils him rotten and takes care 
of his every need. We’ve heard them all.
To “Did I Marry a Man or a Boy?” and all the other women 
in relationships with mama’s boys, I say: stop coming up with  
excuses, and recognize that he’s a mama’s boy because you let 
him be one.
Yes, I said it: It’s. Your. Fault.
Let me tell you why a man will get up out of a warm bed 
with a beautiful naked woman in it, pull on his clothes, grab his 
keys, and get in his car at 10:42 P.M., with his children and 
woman in the house alone, to drive all the way across town to 
bake cakes doggone near the middle of the night for his moth-
er’s bake sale: because his mother has set requirements and stan-
dards for that man, and his woman has not.
Look, I already told you how this works: a man who loves 
you will be the man you need him to be if you have require-
ments—standards you set to make the relationship work the 
way you want it to. A real man is happy and eager to live by 
your rules, as long as he knows what the rules are and he’s sure 
that abiding by those rules will help keep the woman he loves 
happy. The only thing you have to do is establish the rules, say 
them out loud early in the relationship, and make sure he sticks 
to them.
But if you don’t have any standards or requirements, guess 
whose rules he’s going to follow? That’s right, his mother’s. She 
was the ﬁrst woman to tell him what she would and would not 
accept; if she told him to wash his hands before he sat at the 
dinner table, be back in the house before the streetlights came 
on, go to Sunday school on Sundays, protect his sister when the 
two of them were out, and always—always—listen to and trust 
his mother, guess what this boy was going to do? He was going 
to follow those rules to the letter (mostly), because he did not 
want to deal with the consequences that came if he didn’t listen 
to and respect his mother. He also followed those rules because 
he loved his mother, and her rules (mostly) never changed; oh, 
they adapted to his age and circumstances, but a mother always 
keeps some rules front and center for the men in her life, no 
matter her son’s station in life, including respecting her, loving 
her unconditionally, and protecting and providing for the woman 
who gave him life. She never relinquishes those standards and 
requirements, and her son, if he’s a responsible, thoughtful, loving 
son, doesn’t really ever break away from them.
Until, that is, he ﬁnds a woman he loves and who loves him 
back and has sense enough to set some ground rules and re-
quirements for the relationship, chief among them the 
following:
 You need to respect me.
 You must put me and our kids after God and above all 
others.
 Be clear to everyone involved in our lives that they 
will respect your relationship—and me.
Now, if you’ve never set those rules up, and his mother’s 
never relinquished hers, is it a wonder that he’s going to leave 
you in the bed naked while he goes to bake cakes? It’s not that 
she has a hold on this man; it’s that you never bothered to take 
the reins. Think about what “Did I Marry a Man or a Boy?” 
said: she’s been in a relationship with her husband for ten and a 
half years, and not once did she step forward and express her 
displeasure when her man’s mother called the house to put him 
to work. “All these years I have kept my thoughts about this to 
myself . . .” she wrote. So if she never told her man she doesn’t 
like it when he leaves her and the kids to run over to his moth-
er’s house, and she doesn’t like it when he allows his mother to 
yell at him like a child, and she doesn’t want him cooking, 
painting, driving, and doing laundry for his mother when she 
needs him to do things around their house, how, exactly, was 
he supposed to know that his interactions with his mother vio-
late his wife’s standards? Men cannot read minds, and we are 
completely incapable of anticipating what you want.
So you have to speak up.
She didn’t say it in the letter, but my guess is that “Did I 
Marry a Man or a Boy?” failed to speak up about her mother-
in-law’s abuse of power for over a decade because she was afraid 
that he would leave her—that if she tried to drive a wedge be-
tween her man and his mom, he’d choose his mother over her. 
I’ll tell you, though, that men don’t work this way; if your man 
truly loves you and he’s a real man, he’ll ﬁgure out a way to get 
his mom onboard with making his woman happy—to smooth 
everything out so that the relationship can work for all parties 
involved.
First, acknowledge that you can’t compete with this woman: 
she changed his diapers, she can cook his favorite dish exactly 
the way he likes it, she knows most of—if not all—of his friends, 
and she’s known him longer than anybody. Her blood courses 
through his veins. If he loves his mother and they have a good 
relationship, you’re not going to get in the middle of that. (And 
honestly, you’ll realize it’s much better to be in a relationship 
with a man who loves his mother than it is to be with someone 
who can’t stand the woman who gave birth to him; I’m going 
to go out on a limb here and say that the latter probably won’t 
ever be able to commit to a loving, stable relationship with a  
woman if he couldn’t get that single most important, obvious, 
easy male/female relationship right, but the guy who loves his 
mother and treats her with respect is the guy who will know 
how to act with you.) But you most certainly can work with 
your man and his mom by controlling what you do have con-
trol over—by using your powers to set standards and require-
ments that he needs to abide by as the two of you work to 
create a family or to blend your families together. Instead of 
writing an angry “Strawberry Letter” in the middle of the 
night when her man tiptoed out of the house to help his mom, 
“Did I Marry a Man or a Boy?” should have stopped her hus-
band at the bedroom door and told him something like, “Look, 
I know you love your mother and you’d do anything for her, 
but it’s not acceptable to me for you to leave me and these babies 
here in this house alone to bake cookies. If you choose to go 
over there, then you need to stay over there for the night.”
This would not have been evil or unreasonable. Leaving a 
woman and children in the house at a quarter to eleven at 
night—whether to bake cookies or go to the strip club—is un-
acceptable if that woman thinks it is. And if she lets her man 
know this, she’s making him aware of the standards he needs to 
live up to in order to stay in their relationship. Once it’s sa id, 
the ball is in his court. He can either go bake cookies, or he ca n 
be a man and call his mother and set it straight—tell her he can’t 
come by tonight, but he can drop off some store-bought baked 
goods in the morning before he leaves for work. His mother 
may not be happy about this, but what would you care? Again, 
you can’t control how she feels about her son’s actions, and you 
can’t control her son’s actions, but you can control how you feel 
and what you expect of your man.
Now, “Did I Marry a Man or a Boy?” waited almost eleven 
years to have her say, but if you’re just now getting into a rela-
tionship with a man, you’re going to have to get this thing out 
on the table. Tell him that you don’t ever want to come be-
tween him and his mother, but you sure don’t want to compete 
with her, either, so he’ll have to do what he has to do to let his 
mother know that (a) under no certain terms are the needs of 
his girlfriend/ﬁancée/wife ever going to come second, and 
(b) she should respect his need to be a protector and provider 
for the woman to whom he’s professed his love. Don’t worry, he 
understands his need to do this; no real man anywhere needs 
his mother more than he needs his woman. He recognizes 
pretty early on that the support he gets from his mother—
clothes, housing, education, nurturing, and so on—needs to 
come to an end when manhood is full throttle, and that if he is 
to have a true, loving, lasting relationship with a woman, he 
needs to cut the proverbial umbilical cord from his mom so that 
he can give life to his new family—his own family.
All you have to do is speak up.
Tell him straight up: “I need you here to protect and provide 
for us, to give us security in our lives, to help raise these chil-
dren, to set an example for this boy, who needs to see what real 
men do, and for this girl, who needs to know what a real man 
is so she can ﬁnd one of her own someday. I need you to be the 
head of this family.”
Lay it out like this, and your requirements will trump his 
mother’s every time.

8
Why Men Cheat
 From the male perspective, the answers to the question 
“Why do men cheat?” are crystal clear. Not so much for 
women. No matter how good or sensible the reasons are, 
men know that women will never hear one and say, “Oh! Now 
I get it!” There are neither words big enough nor experts with 
enough credentials and letters behind their name to slice it and 
dice it up in a way that’s palatable for most women; inevitably, 
responses to this million-dollar question are always going to 
sound like ten-dollar answers.
And who could argue with that? For (most) women, after all, 
cheating is unthinkable and (at ﬁrst blush) unforgivable—you 
don’t and can’t comprehend why a man would be unfaithful, and 
you won’t ever pretend to. You ﬁgure that if you’ve told him you 
love him; given him your mind, your body, and your time; 
moved in with him; shared the bills with him; done his laundry; 
cooked his food; borne his children; and said an enthusiastic, “I 
do,” in front of the Lord, the pastor, your mother, and all her best 
friends and yours, too, the least your man can do is honor what is 
most sacred to you: the promise of ﬁdelity. He can lie (every once 
in a while), fall down on the housework and the child rearing, 
get a little lax in the income department, pay more attention to 
his boys and his mother than he does to you, and slip into the 
mediocre category when it comes to the boudoir—even say the 
Lord’s name in vain while you’re walking out the door to go to 
yet another church ser vice alone.
But let a man step out on his woman, and watch the earth 
move.
That’s my way of saying that women will put up with a lot 
of things.
Cheating is not one of them.
Now, we men? We understand this. We know what it takes 
to tip, we’re capable of calculating the collateral damage that 
comes with getting caught, and we know that getting back into 
the graces of the woman we cheated on—and her mother, and 
her friends, and anyone else who’s sympathized with her having 
to resurrect herself from such a devastating life event—will re-
quire a Herculean effort.
Still, we do it.
Why?
I am not here to justify a cheating man’s actions. Rather, this 
is my humble attempt to explain to you why a man might go on 
ahead and get a little something on the side, and what you can do 
to cut down the chances that your man will do this to you. So 
let’s just go on ahead and get right to it. Men cheat because. . .
Dress it up any way you want to, but men don’t view sex the 
way you women do, plain and simple. For a lot of you, the act of 
intercourse is emotional—an act of love. That’s understandable, 
considering the sheer physics of the act; you have to lie back and 
allow a foreign object to enter your body. You’ve been taught all 
your life that you only let that kind of deeply intimate moment 
happen with someone who really means something to you.
By contrast, when it comes to men and sex, neither emotions 
nor meaning necessarily enter the equation. It’s easy—very 
easy—for a man to have sex, go home, wash it off with soap and 
water, and act like what he just did never happened. Sex can be 
a purely physical act for us—love has absolutely nothing to do 
with it. Consider this “Strawberry Letter” from a woman who 
called herself “Concerned”:
During a conversation with my husband of 20 years, I asked 
him if he would honestly always be satisﬁed with having 
sex with me only. He hesitated for so long before answering 
that I just knew he was going to say “no.” He then went on 
to explain that he loved me and would never do anything 
to hurt me, but if I gave him permission to have sex with 
other women and not form relationships with them, he 
would. He said that as he’s gotten older, he’s been wonder-
ing if he is still attractive and sexually appealing, and that 
attention from another younger woman would boost his 
ego. Then he asked me if I would be willing to give him 
permission to have sex with other women if he promised to 
let them know up front that it’s only sex he’s interested in 
and he’s not interested in a relationship. He even offered to 
answer any questions I’d have with his encounters, or, if I 
didn’t want to know about it, to just do it and not tell me 
what and when it happened. Obviously, he’s got a problem 
with monogamy. Should I consent so that a potential for 
sneaking around can be eliminated? What can I do to get 
him to change his thinking—if anything?
The answer to that last question in the “Strawberry Letter” is, 
not much. A man can love his wife, his children, his home, and 
the life that they’ve all built together, and have an incredible 
physical connection to her, and still get some from another 
woman without a second thought about it, because the actual act 
with the other woman meant nothing to him. It was something 
that may have made him feel good physically, but emotionally, 
his heart—the professing, providing, and protecting he saves for 
the woman he loves—may be at home with his woman.
Now ﬁlter that bit of information through the lens of, say, a 
high-powered man who has a wife whose job is equally presti-
gious and demanding. I don’t profess to know what goes on 
behind closed doors in that kind of household, but by all public 
accounts, that  couple could be perfectly happy, in love, support-
ive—down for each other. Still, her job could take her overseas, 
leaving her man at home to run the household, take care of the 
kids, and keep up his demanding work schedule for weeks on 
end, without so much as a hot-and-heavy phone conversation to 
help him make it through the enormous time period he’d have 
to go without having sex. Trust me when I say this: under this 
situation, plenty of men would easily justify their getting some 
from somewhere else. Neither he, nor any other man, for that 
matter, is going to go without sex too long. It’s not that he doesn’t 
love his wife. But he’s there, coming home exhausted from a hard 
day’s work, cooking dinner, shuttling the kids around to all their 
after-school functions, and checking homework. He’s stressed 
out, and plenty of us men can hear what he may have worked out 
in his mind: I’m going to go over here and let this other woman 
tighten me up, and then I’ll come back and cook, shuttle, and 
work until the woman I love comes back to me.
This may seem like a cold piece of work to you, but to a 
man, it’s reasonable. He’s got to try to feel better some kind of  
way, and so he’s going to get sex from someone if he can’t get it 
from you. You see it as betrayal. Men see it as just a way to get 
tightened up, especially if. . .
Of course, men will consider the risks of getting caught 
cheating on his lady. But mostly, men initiate affairs pretty con-
ﬁdent that they’re going to get away with it, and most certainly 
with all kinds of conﬁdence that if they get caught, their denials 
will see them through. I used to do a joke where I would en-
courage men to ride their lie all the way out. I told them, “I 
don’t care if somebody got a picture of my butt up in the air in 
the pump position with my social security number stamped on 
the left-hand side of my cheek, I’m going to tell my wife, ‘It 
ain’t me—I don’t know who that is with my social security 
number all over his butt, with the same shoes as me, but that’s 
not me!’ ”
Now, that’s my joke, but most men don’t consider getting 
caught a laughing matter. A man who cheats has most certainly 
calculated the collateral damage that would come from getting 
busted—potential loss of the woman he loves, his children, his 
home, and his peace of mind—and he recognizes that this would 
be a devastating blow to all the things that matter in his life. We 
all are quite familiar with the saying “Hell hath no fury like a 
woman scorned,” and men understand its meaning much better 
than you do; we know the hell is coming and there will be 
plenty of scorn if we get busted.
Still, men don’t really ever think they’re going to get caught. 
Basically, we think we’re slick and we go to great lengths to 
hide our inﬁdelity from you, always with this in mind: if you 
don’t know about it, it can’t hurt you. We’re pretty conﬁdent 
that your willingness to be in a relationship with us supersedes 
all the things we do that look suspicious, because we know 
you’ll work through the suspicion—that it’s more important to 
you to be with us in our imperfection than to leave us and be 
alone. At least that’s what we’re hoping. And in the beginning, 
mostly, you will. But the moment your suspicions turn into a 
Law & Order –type investigation, we’re going to lie and deny.
That’s if we care about you.
But if not—if a man doesn’t see you ﬁtting into his life 
plan—he won’t even bother with all of the covering up and the 
chitchat after he gets found out. He’ll simply tell you that he 
was sleeping with someone else because. . .
You may think this is a cop-out, but it is the reality. It goes 
back to the way men judge themselves against each other: I told 
you in the introduction and have reiterated elsewhere in the 
book that we are deﬁned by who we are, what we do, and how 
much we make. And if we haven’t gotten to where we want 
and need to be, then we’re not going to be ready to ﬁgure out 
how settling down with one woman ﬁts into our plans for be-
coming a truly independent, mature, well-off man. I mean, 
how many times have you seen or been in a relationship where 
the man says over and over again, “When I get my money 
right, I’ll think about commitment,” or, “I just need to get that 
promotion ﬁrst, then I’ll settle down.” That guy is still trying 
to complete himself, and while he’s working toward that, he’s 
not organizing his life to include a committed relationship. He 
tells himself he simply doesn’t have time for it—it’s simply not 
a priority for him. And so creep he will.
The same can be true, even, of a man who is married with 
children. The man who is mature and has ﬁgured out who he 
is and is happy with what he does and how much he makes 
probably has his life ordered up correctly; he’s become the man 
he envisioned himself being and has put his priorities in this 
order: God, family, education, business, and then everything 
else. But if family isn’t second, it’s about to be a problem; he’s 
going to dedicate himself to whatever his priorities are, in the 
order in which he’s put them. Even if he’s already said, “I do,” 
and held his babies in his arms and done everything a man’s 
supposed to do to protect and provide for them, if he’s decided 
that it’s more important to him to fulﬁll that hunting jones, then 
that’s going to be the priority for him—he’s not going to sync up 
with your demand that he be faithful. He’s not going to rub it in 
your face, and he’s going to do everything he can to preserve 
what he has with you, but he’s still going to have a little some-
thing on the side. Really, it’s got nothing to do with you.
I have a friend who’s successful, has plenty of money, a beau-
tiful family—the ideal life. And one evening while we were 
sitting around with a few of our friends shooting the breeze 
about how satisﬁed we are with our stations in life, my boy an-
nounced with a slick grin, “I love my wife, man, but I got this 
cold one on the side.” We were surprised—don’t get me wrong. 
But we accepted that from him because we all know that this 
man hasn’t got his priorities right yet, and there’s nothing we 
can do or say to make him do it. He knows that once he’s stepped 
out on his wife, he’s putting something else before God and 
family. But only he can put his house in order. Now, if he’s 
young, that might come with mental maturity; the old-timers 
say all the time that experience is priceless—too bad you have to 
pay for it with your youth. Of course, maturity and age go hand 
in hand, but circumstances bring it about, too: if a man is a spiri-
tual person and he’s got a relationship with God, he’ll mature 
much more quickly, just because his beliefs will hold him to a 
much more stringent moral code. And that moral code will au-
tomatically make him put family second, because this is what a 
relationship with God demands. Now, he’ll make it a priority  to 
ﬁnd a woman who completes his life, someone who can be the 
mother of his children—who can make his unit complete.
Sometimes men wise up without God in their lives. I have a 
buddy who had all kinds of women doing all kinds of things to 
him and for him, and he ﬁnally got into a position where he 
said, “Man, I got all these women and I can get them to do all 
these things and give me all these things, but I’m not happy. I 
don’t have any peace and I just don’t feel like I have my life 
together.” And right then and there, he made the decision to 
stop treating women the way he’d been treating them and get 
what he was ﬁnally yearning for: a family. His philandering 
stopped cold. He’s not saved. He didn’t have some big revelation 
with God, he didn’t get called to the ministry. He just decided 
he needed to do something different to ﬁnd the joy in his life, 
and the only way he could ﬁnd that was with someone, and 
only one someone, special.
When a man ﬁnds that joy—the chances of his cheating get 
really slim. Unless. . .
That’s right, I said it: it could have something to do with 
you. Your man may be walking around telling himself that 
your relationship just doesn’t have that spark anymore, that you 
don’t turn him on like you used to—that you don’t come on to 
him like you did when the two of you ﬁrst fell in love. You 
know how it goes: the two of you get comfortable with each 
other, settle in, have some babies, buy a house, and then get 
bogged down in the bills and raising the kids and going to work 
and keeping up with the rat race that comes when you’re a 
family trying to make it. The next thing he knows, the woman 
who used to wear and do little things to keep it hot and spicy 
isn’t interested in doing that little thing she did when the two 
of them ﬁrst got together. In fact, the sex has become unin-
spired; she’s coming in from work, where she was dressed up in 
her nice skirt and heels and makeup and such, and she’s break-
ing down before she can get to the door good. And now, after 
a long day at work, and even more work when she gets home, 
she’s coming to bed in a head scarf and a T-shirt and is this close 
to hiring a ﬁring squad to take you out for even looking at her 
with those bedroom eyes.
In other words, what’s back at the house has become ho-
hum—routine. And this man is missing the spark that used to 
be there. Y ou’ve changed. (He knows he’s changed, too, but 
we’re not talking about him, we’re talking about you.) Perhaps 
that comes, too, with a feeling that you don’t appreciate him 
like you used to. The thank-yous come less frequently, there’s a 
lot of arguing going on—turmoil seems to get up with you in 
the morning and cuddle up with the two of you at night. And 
your home just isn’t feeling like what he signed up for. And if  
he can’t get what he signed up for back at the house, he’s more 
likely to go out and ﬁnd it somewhere else, because guess what? 
He knows he can always go ﬁnd it somewhere else, particularly 
since. . .
That’s the truth that no woman wants to face. Imagine if 
every woman said, “You’re married—I can’t do that with you.” 
Man, do you know how many marriages and relationships 
would still exist today? Men can cheat because there are so many 
women willing to give themselves to a man who doesn’t belong 
to them. Sure, every now and again there are women who get 
fooled and don’t know that a man is already spoken for. A ma-
jority of the time, however, these women know they’re sleeping 
with a married man. Yes, these are the women who have no 
standards and requirements and who suffer from serious self-
esteem issues, making themselves willing to cheat and available 
to be cheated on. If those women took themselves out of the 
cheater’s circle, the incidence of cheating would be cut seriously 
down. And the way to get out of that cheater’s circle is to do 
exactly what I’m teaching you to do in this book: ﬁgure out 
your standards and requirements, explain them, and stick to 
them (Chapter 9), get to really know the man by asking ﬁve es-
sential questions you’ll need to know to move a relationship 
forward (see Chapter 10), and follow the Ninety-Day Rule (see 
Chapter 11). And then teach all of this to your daughters, too. 
If we don’t, after all, break that cycle, the cheating will 
continue.
So, ladies, the reasons I’ve given here are the primary rea-
sons men cheat, but trust me, there are many, many more. A 
man is always going to have a reason to justify why he’s doing 
wrong, and those reasons will change from man to man and 
woman to woman. What’s important for you to understand, 
though, is that regardless of a man’s reasons, he knows what you 
know: it’s wrong to commit to someone and promise to remain 
faithful and then go against that—especially if this was one of 
your mate’s requirements. Women can go over it again and 
again in their minds, ﬁnding all kinds of deﬁciencies in them-
selves—“I didn’t do this right,” “I wasn’t good enough,” “I 
didn’t love him the way I should,” “she came in here and out-
performed me”—but the fact still remains that he didn’t have 
any business cheating. So women need to release themselves 
from the blame of a cheating man’s actions—just do that for 
yourselves. Because holding on to that baggage can be paralyz-
ing; it can cripple you and keep you from performing in your 
next encounter. You simply cannot drive forward if you’re fo-
cused on what’s happening in the rearview mirror.
You can, however, limit the amount of times you’re cheated 
on again. You do that by upping the ante on your requirements.  
See, you have a lot more power to limit the things that happen 
to you—you’ve got the power of persuasion, your power of 
intuition, your power of suggestion, standards to help keep you 
protected. If you let a man know up front that you’ll tolerate a 
lot of things but cheating is not one of them, then he’s really 
clear on the fact that if he steps out of the union, he stays out of 
the union. And if he breaks that promise and steps out anyway? 
You’ve got to be prepared to let him go and walk away. You 
can’t ﬁnd out your man cheated, confront him about it, and 
then stay with him, only to question his every move and nag 
him about what he’s doing every chance you get. Because that 
simply means you never really forgave him, and you’re creating 
a situation that’s ripe for him to cheat again. You’ve got to 
either let him go, or ﬁnd it in your heart to truly forgive the 
man and work on a way to move forward with him.
Now sometimes, it takes a man to lose something or nearly 
lose something to really appreciate it. But isn’t that true of ev-
erybody? Some men cheat because there’s never been a penalty 
for it. But if a man who’s cheated on you sees you walking out 
the door and you matter to him, please know that at this point 
he’s very vulnerable and open to learning. Should he win you 
back, he’s going to straighten up and ﬂy right because he’s 
almost lost his girl and his family, which means he’ll do most 
anything you tell him to get back into your good graces. He’s 
going to work to earn your trust back—follow your require-
ments to get back on the team. If that means he has to be home 
by a certain time, call when he’s going to be late, send ﬂowers 
every week, ﬁnd a sitter so you all can have a date night on 
Thursdays, go to church with you on Sundays, even sit on a 
psychologist’s couch and air out all of your dirty laundry until 
you’re satisﬁed he’s a changed man, then that’s what he’ll do. 
Once there’s a penalty and he’s forced to say to himself, “Wow, 
everything I’ve ever loved was about to be lost,” he may very 
well come through the ﬁre a better man.
Is that to say it’s going to be easy to forgive him and not be 
suspicious? No. But he may eventually earn your trust back and 
be willing to work through it with you. He’s not going to like 
being asked questions about where he’s been, he’s going to hate 
not being able to be intimate with you while you work through 
your anger, and he’s going to be really reluctant to carry his 
butt down to the psychologist’s ofﬁce with you. But in his heart 
of hearts, he knows that’s a part of working his way back into 
your heart. He knows he created this—he knows what he did, 
and he understands the consequences, ramiﬁcations, and reper-
cussions way better than you think he does. We understand 
penalties, and we know it’s going to be straight hell. Trust me, 
I know. Because it’s happened to me. It happens to a lot of men. 
You can’t be a man of power and not step outside your house. I 
don’t know one man of power who has not stepped outside his 
house. Such a man may exist but I have not met him. But I do 
know men of power who have learned to do right, go home, 
and take care of their families. Each one of them eventually gets 
to that. I certainly have; now, I carry my behind home. I had to 
come to this, though. And guess what? I know a lot of those 
same men—entertainers, ball players, executives, and so on—who 
have turned into some of the best husbands and fathers in the 
world, because they’ve lined up their life responsibilities in th e 
right order: God, family, education, and then business. And 
their wives? They’ve become better wives in the process, 
too—by trying to create a little bit of that magic they had when 
their relationship was fresh and new. She might come home 
from work and instead of kicking off those heels, keep them on 
and whisper in his ear to meet her in the bedroom for a pre-
dinner snack. Or she might smile a little more, act a little bit 
more happy, be a tad bit more spontaneous—appreciate her 
man more, and show it, too.
This was certainly the story of one of my really good friends. 
His wife found out about his woman on the side, and she left 
him—went to her mother’s house for seven months and took 
his son with her. Dude was miserable. I mean, he was losing 
weight. We would go by to get him and say, “Let’s go out and 
have a good time,” and he would tell us, “Eh, I don’t feel like 
it.” We even offered to take him to see the woman he had on 
the side, in hopes that at least getting some from her would 
make him feel a little bit better, but he refused her, too. “I’m 
through with that,” he insisted. “I lost my marriage, my boy is 
gone—the  people who mattered most to me are gone. And I 
want them back.”
It took him a year and a half to get this woman back. I don’t 
know what’s going on behind their closed doors, but I’ll tell 
you one thing: she’s got the ideal husband now. Any married 
man can look at him and see how to get it done. But two things 
had to happen to him: ﬁrst, he had to ﬁnd out what was impor-
tant to him, and what it was like to lose it. And second, he had 
to come to the realization that he needed to restructure his 
priorities: God ﬁrst, then family. And you know what? He goes 
home every night. He’s making money, he’s extremely happy, 
and their family has nothing to worry about. And I heard his 
wife say, “My new man is something else.”
They’ve been living in their happily ever after for thirty-
three years now. He’s a helluva dude, man—and she’s a lucky 
lady.

The PlaybookPART  THREE

9
Men Respect Standards— 
Get Some
 There are a few things you should know about my wife, 
Marjorie: She is incredibly talented and supportive. 
She is just as beautiful on the inside as she is on the 
outside. She loves the Lord. She is a terriﬁc mother to our chil-
dren. She’s classy and smart. And she cares for, respects, and 
adores me deeply.
You should also know that my wife has a set of standards that 
I have known about and respected from the ﬁrst day I met her.
It started while I was doing a show in Memphis. She walked 
in with another attractive woman. I couldn’t help myself; I 
stopped mid-joke and said, “Excuse me, I know you don’t know 
me, but one of these days, I’m going to marry you.” She laughed 
and said, “You don’t know me.” But I didn’t care and I told her 
as much. I knew right then and there we were going to be mar-
ried some day (of course, this was really more of a hope than a 
certainty—smile).
Maybe she knew it, too, or at least liked what she saw because 
even though she disappeared the night I informed her of my 
plan, she showed up two nights later at another show of mine, 
and this time, I asked her to come backstage and talk for a while. 
She agreed, and we became fast friends, and even dated for a 
spell. But eventually, we both went our separate ways. Still, Mar-
jorie and I always remembered the friendship we had together, 
and we reached out to check up on each other from time to 
time.
Finally, Marjorie and I reconnected and started dating again; 
we got serious pretty quickly, both of us realizing that we had 
missed out on a great relationship once, and we didn’t want to 
risk losing out on it again. But, even though I knew I was in 
love with this woman and that she loved me, I was still con-
nected to some women friends I had developed after my divorce, 
when I had really started dating again.
Well, one particular night when Marjorie was visiting me at 
my home in New York on Valentine’s Day weekend, one of 
those friends called my cell. I didn’t talk much—said, “Hi,” 
told her we’d chat another time and that I’d stop and see her if 
and when I was back in town, and then hung up. I didn’t even 
think Marjorie heard the conversation—at least she wasn’t 
acting like she did. I should have known better, though. She’s 
got that “mother” hearing—doesn’t miss a thing. And sure 
enough, late that night, when I got up to go to the bathroom—
it was about 3:00 A.M.—there was Marjorie in the hallway, 
standing there in her fur coat with her suitcase in her hand. She 
was going to leave me—leave us.
“Where you going?” I asked her. Her response made me 
realize right then and there, in the middle of that hallway, in 
the middle of the night, that she was The One.
“I’m not trying to be anybody’s plaything or anybody’s 
woman on a string,” she said matter-of-factly, her suitcase still 
in her hand. “I don’t think you’re ready for what I have to offer. 
I got these kids, I have a good life, and I want a man who will 
come in and complete my family. If this is what you want, too, 
I’ll be in Memphis.”
After I picked up my jaw, I asked her to give me one more 
chance, took her bags, and immediately found my phone and 
snapped it in half. I’d lost her once—this beautiful, smart, sweet 
woman—and no other woman could be as loving and dedi-
cated to me, to us, or to my children. I realized right then and 
there, in that hallway, that I wanted no other.
In other words, I became the man she needed me to be be-
cause she had sense enough to have requirements—standards 
that she needed in her relationship in order to make the rela-
tionship work for her. She knew she wanted a monogamous 
relationship—a partnership with a man who wanted to be a 
dedicated husband and father. She also knew this man had to be 
faithful, love God, and be willing to do what it took to keep 
this family together. On a smaller scale, she also made clear that 
she expected to be treated like a lady at every turn—I’m talking 
opening car doors for her, pulling out her seat when she’s ready 
to sit at the table, coming correct on anniversary, Mother’s  Day, 
and birthday gifts, keeping the foul talk to a minimum. These 
requirements are important to her because they govern how she 
will be treated; they are important to me, too, because they lay 
out a virtual map of what all I need to do to make sure she gets 
what she needs and wants. After all, it’s universal knowledge 
that when mama is happy, everybody is happy. And it is my sole 
mission in life to make sure Marjorie is happy.
Men can’t accomplish this mission for you without your 
help; we can’t possibly begin to fathom what it is you women 
need and want because your needs and wants change from 
woman to woman like the wind does from city to city. Men are 
very simple, logical  people; if you tell us what you like and 
what you don’t like, we’ll do anything we can to make sure we 
live up to your expectations, particularly if we’re interes ted in 
forging a relationship with you. (But beware of telling a man 
everything you like when you ﬁrst meet; I’ll tell you why later 
in the chapter.)
But really, we’re not programmed to ﬁgure it out. It really 
makes us quite happy when you lay out your requirements for 
us. And we need you to do it up front, so we can decide if we’re 
up for the challenge—not two weeks into the relationship, not 
two months after we’ve had sex, not two years after we’ve said 
“I do” in front of the preacher and our respective families and 
friends. Heck, we’ll take them while you’re standing there at 
the bar, sipping on the peach martini we just bought you, so 
long as you’re laying them out. Because now you’ve given us a 
road map for how to conduct ourselves, especially if we’re truly 
interested in a relationship with you.
Understand that this chapter is not a license for you to start 
running down your list of “I can’ts” and “I won’ts” and “you 
better not nevahs” as soon as a gentleman approaches you. We 
do like some kind of decorum. You’ve got to ﬁnesse the situa-
tion—tell a man what you require without making it feel like 
you’re ticking off a list of demands. It really is all in the deliv-
ery; if you tell him your requirements in the midst of conversa-
tion, and they sound attainable, and you shape your standards in 
soft language, it’ll be easier for him to understand, and, more 
important, act on them. Think about how crazy he’s going to 
look at you if, ﬁnger wagging, you just come out your face and 
say, “I will not tolerate a man who does not understand my role 
as a mother—if you got a problem with my kids and the rest of 
my family, you got a problem with me!” It’ll be the equivalent 
of the needle scratching all the way across the record; he’s going 
to think, at best, that you’re angry—at worst, you’re crazy, and  
perhaps your family is, too. But imagine how he’ll feel if you 
ﬂip the script and say something pleasant like, “Oh, you know, 
I have kids and they’re number one in my life because my par-
ents raised me to understand the importance of family.” Now, 
he knows you’re one of those good girls—sweet, responsible,  
and family oriented. If he’s not that guy, he’ll move on to the 
next woman—the one with no requirements who’s down for 
whatever. But if he’s a man who shares your belief in the im-
portance of family, he’s going to keep talking to you, and listen 
for more of your standards.
Here are a few more examples I’ve laid out for you so you 
can see how to wrap up your requirements in one of those 
pretty bows.
Instead of saying you “can’t stand it” when a man shows up 
late, say something like, “Everybody is so busy these days—
time sure is precious, isn’t it? I go out of my way to make sure 
that if I say I’m going to be somewhere at 7:00 P.M., I’m going 
to be there at 7:00 P.M., if not earlier, so that we can do what we 
need to do in a timely manner, and if I’m going to be late, it 
only takes a phone call to be courteous.”
Translation:  You’ve just told him that you require the man in 
your life to show up when he says he’s going to show up, and 
have enough manners and class to call if he’s going to be late. 
Now he knows to leave a few minutes earlier so he gets to you 
on time, and to make sure his cell is charged in case he needs to 
give you a head’s-up.
Instead of saying,  “If you’re dating and sleeping with other 
women, I am not the one!”  say something like, “I’m always 
honest with the man I’m dating; if I feel like I want to see other 
 people besides him, I let him know up front so that he can 
decide if he wants to continue the relationship as is, or ask me 
to date him exclusively.”
Translation:  You’ve just told him that you require the man in 
your life to be honest and up front about the parameters of the 
relationship—if he’s going to play, he’s going to have to let 
you know so that you can make intelligent, rational decisions 
about how to deal with that. You’ve told him, too, that this is 
up for discussion—that the two of you can decide together 
what it is you want out of the relationship, instead of having it 
dictated to him.
Instead of saying,  “If my man doesn’t have God in his life 
and doesn’t know how to jog for Jesus, there’s no need in 
him even opening his mouth to me,  perhaps you can say 
something like, “Sunday is my favorite day of the week, be-
cause I get to go to church and fellowship with like-minded 
 people and exercise my faith. By the time ser vice is over, I feel 
so uplifted, I know the rest of my week is going to go great.”
Translation:  You’ve made clear that you’re a God-fearing, 
churchgoing woman who knows the Lord and takes her faith 
seriously, and you’ve opened up the conversation for him to 
give his take on how he feels about religion and spirituality.
Instead of saying,  “I got three kids and two jobs because 
these children’s daddy ain’t worth a damn, so any man 
stepping to me better have bank and be ready to raise some 
kids the right way or hit the highway,  you might want to say 
something like, “Being a good mom is really important to me, and 
a part of being a good mom is making sure that my kids have a 
good father. I’m independent, but I realize how much better it 
would be for me and my family if a good man was in the picture.
Translation:  You will have made clear that while you’re quite 
capable of taking care of your own children, you recognize the 
importance of having a good man in the mix—something that 
will make a man who’s willing to put in the work understand 
that he will be appreciated for being a good husband and father. 
And that’s really all a man wants—a little appreciation every 
now and again.
Get the picture? Now, you’ve given us what we think is 
valuable information about the woman we’re interested in. But 
more important, you’ve told us what your standards are, thoug h 
you’ve done so by disguising them in a whole lot of pretty talk. 
It’s like grape-ﬂavored cough syrup; it’s still medicine, but it’s 
just going to taste better going down.
Now, I should add that while men appreciate it when women 
let them know up front what they require in a relationship, I 
ﬁrmly believe women need to step back every once in a while 
and let the man show you what he’s made of—you know, prove 
that he’s worthy of your time. I really do believe one of the big-
gest mistakes women make early on in the relationship is laying 
out in full detail all the things you love a man to do for you, 
without giving him a chance to show you what he’s willing  to do 
for you. I mean, it’s nice and all that you like long walks by the 
beach, and chocolate on Valentine’s Day, and you favor lilies in 
the summertime. But how, exactly, do you ﬁnd out how cre-
ative, exciting, or giving a man is if you give him the blueprint 
for how to coax a smile on to your face, without requiring him 
to ﬁgure some of this out on his own? Be sure of this: if you tell 
a man you like red roses at work, dinner at that special restaurant 
across town, and Chanel bags for your birthday, that is exactly 
what he will give you—nothing less, but certainly nothing more. 
And you’ll be happy about it—at ﬁrst. But then give it about 
forty-ﬁve days or so, and he’s going to stop doing what you told 
him you like because he’ll have ﬁgured he did what he needed 
to do to get what he wanted. And you will think that because he 
stopped, he changed. And you’ll go tell your girlfriends, “I d on’t 
know what happened—he used to do everything I like.”
He did everything you like because you told him what you like.
My philosophy? Instead of telling him what you like, tell 
him what you don’t like, and then see how he responds; let him 
research and dig and ﬁgure out how to get to your sweet spot. 
Just go right ahead and put it out there: “I’m not a fan of just 
sitting around in the house on the weekends,” or “I don’t like it 
when a man doesn’t treat me like a lady,” or “I don’t like going 
to the same restaurants over and over again.” Then, as your 
relationship progresses, watch his actions. For sure, you’ll get 
his blueprint for how he conducts himself—you’ll see what he’s 
willing to give freely of his own accord. You don’t like going 
to the same restaurants? He’ll know to ﬁnd new, interesting 
places to take you. You don’t like sitting in the house on Satur-
days? He’ll be sure to take you out to a concert or a new 
museum exhibit, or he’ll at least look through the newspaper 
and see what’s going on around town so he has some sugges-
tions for what you all can do together. He knows you don’t like 
 people who aren’t family oriented? He’s going to bring treats 
for the kids when he meets them, or even offer to take you and 
them to the park for a quick game of catch or a push on the 
swings, and no matter how uncomfortable he may think he 
might feel, he’s going to go to the barbecue at your mom’s 
house because he knows you require a man who likes and gets 
along with family. Sit back and watch him: see if he opens the 
car door for you, or pulls out your chair when you sit at the 
table, or turns off his phone when he’s with you, so that he can 
dedicate all of his attention to your time together. And then if 
he doesn’t step up to the plate—if he doesn’t show you that he’s 
willing to ﬁgure out how to put a smile on your face—then 
you’ll be in the position to decide if he’s capable of giving you 
what you need and at least some of what you want.
Of course, to lay out your requirements for a man, and 
convey the importance of following those requirements, you 
must ﬁrst ﬁgure out what, exactly, your requirements are. I’ve 
listed questions here that you should consider as you formulate 
your top ten requirements, and I’ve left space for you to docu-
ment your list:
 What speciﬁc kind of man are you looking for? 
(For example, funny? Hardworking? Generous?)
 How do you expect to be pursued? (Do you want 
regular phone calls? Text messages? Dates at least 
three times a week? Do you want him to always pick 
up the tab?)
 What level of commitment do you expect? (Do you 
want an open relationship? Or to date exclusively? 
Should it be up for discussion?)
 What kind of ﬁnancial security do you expect this 
man to have? (Do you want him to be rich? Do you 
want him to make more money than you? Are you 
okay with a blue-collar worker?)
 Do you want a man who wants kids and is family 
oriented?
 Does he have to be religious/spiritual?
 Do you mind if he’s a divorcé or has kids?
 Can you help a man build his dream? Can you adapt 
to his plan?
 What do you expect of his family? (Should you get 
along with his mother? Do you care if he doesn’t get 
along with her? Or if his father was never around?)
 What should he be willing to do to woo you? (Should 
he pursue you? Give you expensive gifts?)

10
The Five Questions Every 
Woman Should Ask Before 
She Gets in Too Deep
 I had just gotten to Hollywood and I was seeing a lot of 
things my then thirty-eight-year-old eyes had never seen 
before. One of those that stood out most was the lifestyle 
of a famous and well-regarded celebrity, whose name I’m just 
going to go ahead and keep to myself. But this much I will tell 
you: this man had it all—money, fame, and a bevy of super-
beauties so bad he could have easily made Hugh Hefner scratch 
his head and wonder how he could get in on that action. I mean 
this man was surrounded by gorgeous women. A lot. All. The. 
Time. And I was amazed at this because I couldn’t understand 
how one person could get all of these ﬁne women like this. I 
mean, he wasn’t the best-looking dude in the business—there 
were others with more money, more prestige, and certainly 
better looks than him. Still, he was a master at keeping a stack 
of solid tens at all times, with commitments to none of them. 
I’d heard about these superplayers with supermodels on their 
arms and everything, but when I saw it up close, I was amazed 
at how the actual connections could happen, and especially 
why these women stayed with this guy, knowing that they 
were one of many hanging on his arm.
And I needed to know how this was done (um, not neces-
sarily so that I, too, could have supermodels hanging on my 
every word, but because I was genuinely blown away by the 
phenomenon). So I sat down and talked to this guy and a bunch 
of other men who were in similar “relationships” and asked 
them point-blank: How do you keep these women coming 
back for more? And each one, including the most notorious of 
the bunch, laughed, shook his head, and said pretty much the 
same thing: those women want the money, the fame, and the 
lifestyle, and they’re willing to put up with a lot of things—not 
many of them good—to get it. “But do they realize,” I asked in 
all earnestness, “that this is going nowhere?” The one guy 
shook his head some more and said, simply, “They don’t know 
where it’s going because they never ask.” He added: “What am 
I supposed to do—tell them I’m just using them for sex and arm 
candy? It just is what it is.”
Blew me away.
And the more I asked the same questions of guys in similar situ-
ations, I heard the same answer, again and again. And each time I 
asked them what could have made it different for the women they 
were with, almost down to the letter, each one of those men said 
the same thing: if a woman came to me and quizzed me up front 
about my intentions, they would have known from the beginning 
that I’m not looking for anything serious. They don’t ask, each one 
said, because they think they’re going to run me off, so I get to just 
string them along. And the one celebrity who seemed to be the 
master of all of this said, quite simply, “I have enough of them so 
that when I get the questions, I don’t have to answer because for 
every one woman who asks, I have two more who won’t.”
Call this what you want: foul; wrong; inexcusable—what-
ever. But that’s how it is. And this kind of thinking from guys 
isn’t just happening in celebrity circles, trust me. It happens 
with everyday guys—doctors and lawyers, truckers and deliv-
erymen, too. Some of them have as many women as some of 
my celebrity friends, and the women they run game on are just 
as ﬁne as some of the supermodels clinging to the arms of stars . 
But if you’re a woman on a string of three or thirty-three, 
you’re still on a string. And both you and I know that’s not a 
good place to be.
Your objective is to avoid being on the string.
The ﬁrst step, I think, is to get over the fear of losing a man 
by confronting him. Just stop being afraid, already. The most 
successful  people in this world recognize that taking chances to 
get what they want is much more productive than sitting around 
being too scared to take a shot. The same philosophy can easily 
be applied to dating: if putting your requirements on the table 
means you risk him walking away, it’s a risk you have to take. 
Because that fear can trip you up every time; all too many of 
you let the guy get away with disrespecting you, putting in 
minimal effort and holding out on the commitment to you 
because you ’ re afraid he’ s going to walk away and you ’ll be 
alone again. And we men? We recognize this and play on it, big 
time. Know this: the game is old, and it’s not ever going to 
change. My sons will do it the same way because they can and 
there will be women who allow it to happen. But you can cer-
tainly know the rules up front, and change up your strategy, so 
you don’t get played.
How do you do this? Start by making the man be really clear 
up front about what he wants out of his life and his relationship 
with you. You do this by asking him these key ﬁve questions—
questions that will help you determine right away what values 
this guy has and how you ﬁt into his plans. I devised these ques-
tions after years of watching men play women, and women fall-
ing for it, and constantly asking myself and even some of my 
friends who are masters at the game, “If I were a woman, how 
could I avoid all of this?” They’re great questions, too—the 
answers will tell you everything you need to know about this 
guy in your life or the guy you hope to have in your life. Asking 
these questions will help you determine whether you should 
s ti c k  ar o un d  t o  s e e  w h e r e  y o ur  r e la ti o ns hi p  g o e s ,  o r  if  y o u  
should run really fast in the opposite direction. Note: There’s 
no need to delay asking these questions—ask them right away, 
as soon as you think you might be remotely attracted to a man 
you’ve met. If he’s turned off by the questions, so what: you have 
the right to the information. And if he isn’t willing to answer 
them, well you know from the gate he’s not the one for you.
So let’s just get started with the questions. Remember: No. 
Fear.
If you’re going to get into a relationship with a man, you 
should know what his plans are and how they ﬁt into the key 
elements that make a man—who he is, what he does, and how 
much he makes. These three things, as I’ve already told you, are 
extremely important to any mature, grown man, and you have 
every right to know what he’s doing right now, and what he’s 
planning over the next three to ﬁve years, to be the real, grown 
man he wants to be. His answer also will help you determine 
whether you want to be a part of that plan or not. You’ll know 
to throw up your much-needed red ﬂag if he doesn’t have a 
plan at all.
If he’s got a plan, well great. Act like you’re superinter-
ested and ask follow-up questions—be the inquisitive, en-
thusiastic detective that you are. Men love to talk about 
themselves. We do this because we know that in order to 
catch you, we have to impress you. So allow us to impress. 
The more inquisitive and interested you are, the more infor-
mation he’ll give you. Say things like, “Wow, how did you 
get into that ﬁeld?” or “How interesting—what does it take 
to make that successful?” And listen carefully. The whole 
time he’s talking, you should be evaluating whether he’s ac-
tually working hard to meet his goals or if he’s a lazy dreamer 
just talking a whole lot of nonsense. You should also be ﬁg-
uring out if you see yourself in that short-term plan; if you 
know what his plan is, you can immediately assess if you 
want to be part of it and what role you can play in it, or if 
you need to remove yourself from that equation. For in-
stance, if he says, “I’m a technician for the cable company, 
but I’m going to college at night to earn my B.A. in engi-
neering so that I can move up the ranks at my job,” then you 
know this guy has a plan and he’s executing it. Maybe you 
can even see yourself helping him study or being there for 
him at graduation and giving him suggestions for how to 
transform himself from the blue-collar worker who installs 
the cable to the engineer who helps build the technology for 
the cable company. The point is, he has a plan and he’s work-
ing toward it, which means that he’s trying to be the man he 
wants to be—the kind that just might ﬁt in line with what 
you’re looking for in a good, solid mate.
But if you ask him what his short-term goals are, and he tells 
you something crazy, like “I’m in street pharmaceuticals, and 
right now I have one block but my goal in the next few years 
is to have ten blocks on the west side from Henry Street to 
Brown Street,” well, then you know right then and there that 
you can go on ahead and keep it moving. The same applies to 
the man who states his short-term goals, but clearly has no plan 
to implement them. For instance, if he says his dream is to be a 
producer, but he’s not doing anything in the ﬁeld to actually 
become one—he’s not interning or working for a ﬁlm com-
pany, he’s not writing or reading any scripts, he’s not making 
any connections in the industry that might open some doors for 
him, he hasn’t worked for four months and has no prospects of 
a job in the ﬁeld he says he’s interested in—then you know this 
man doesn’t have a plan. And if he doesn’t have a plan, he’s not 
going to achieve his short-term goal—or it’s really not a goal, 
he’s just talking out of his behind. Either way, you may not 
want to sign up for his plan. Just stick to your own. Sure, there’s 
a chance that he might get it together and make it in the indus-
try, but why do you have to sign up for that? If he’s got this 
whole pie-in-the-sky dream, ﬁgure out if he’s lying there look-
ing at the stars, or if he’s got a jet pack strapped to his back and 
he’s about to take off to go grab that dream.
Trust me on this: a man who really has a vision for where he 
wants to see himself in ten years has looked into his future and 
seriously considered what it’ll take for him to get there. It means 
he has foresight, and he’s plotting out the steps to his future. If 
he says something silly like “I’m just trying to make it day by  
day,” run. If his long-term plan is the same as his short-term 
plan, get out. Immediately. Because his answer tells you that he 
hasn’t thought his life through, or he doesn’t see you in it and 
so he has no reason to divulge the details to you. All he’s got for 
you is game. If he doesn’t have a plan, why do you want him to 
stick around, anyway?
The man you should consider spending a little time on is the 
one who has a plan—a well-thought-out plan that you can see 
yourself in. Because please believe me when I tell you—and 
like I told you in an earlier chapter—a man always has a plan. I 
know I did when I ﬁrst started working as a comedian. I knew 
before I even told my ﬁrst joke in front of an audience that 
within the next ﬁve years, my goal was to become a headliner 
and make at least $2,500 a week. With my eye on that prize, I 
was soon making $2,500 a week, and happy about it, too. Still, 
I wanted to become a headliner, and I upped the ante: now I 
wanted to make $5,000 to $7,500 per week. It took me about 
eight years, but I managed to meet my ﬁnancial goal—and I 
was happy about that, too.
And then I met Sinbad.
Now at the time, Sinbad was working at a comedy club in 
Birmingham, where he’d become so large, he was making 
$50,000 to $70,000 a week at this one particular club. Every. 
Seven. Days. And I knew I wanted a piece of that action. His 
success made me realize that there was something to this 
comedy thing—that I needed to set in place a long-term plan 
that would afford me the kind of life I could see was possible 
for a comedian. I wanted to get on television  to provide a life-
style for my family that would make them proud. I envisioned 
my life this way, and then created a plan for how I was going 
to get it. Now, I knew it wasn’t going to be easy—that it would 
take time, because there were very few comedy clubs where 
you could make that kind of money, and you had to have the 
right connections and a great team to help get you there. But 
the point is, I had a long-term plan, with steps on how I was 
going to get there. Eventually, I reached those goals and then 
some.
Once you hear your potential mate’ s answer to questions 
number one and number two, you’ll have a ﬁrm understanding 
of the kind of man you’re dealing with. Do not tie your life 
together with a human being who does not have a plan, because 
you’ll ﬁnd out that if he’s not going anywhere, sooner or later, 
you’ll be stuck, too.
Now this one is a multiple-part question that sizes up how a 
man feels about a gamut of relationships—from how he feels 
about his parents and kids to his connection with God. Each 
answer will reveal a lot more about him—whether he’s serious 
about commitment, the kind of household in which he was 
raised, what kind of father and husband he might be, whether 
he knows the Lord, all of that. And the only way you’ll ﬁnd out 
the answers to these questions is to ask. Do it before you kiss 
this man, maybe even before you agree to go on a date with 
him—this is a great phone conversation, for sure. And don’t be 
shy or nervous about asking these questions, either, because 
what are you supposed to be doing with this man if not talking 
to him? If he has a problem talking about this right here, then 
something’s wrong. Run.
First, ﬁnd out how he feels about family. What are his views 
on it? Does he want a family? How does he feel about children? 
If you have a child, tell your man about him or her—it’s his 
business to know, but more important, it’s your business to ﬁnd 
out if he sees himself being a father. If he doesn’t want kids and 
you do, then you can stop all of this right now. (Please know 
that if a man says he doesn’t want kids, he’s probably not going 
to change his mind, regardless of the intensity of his feelings for 
you.) Moreover, if he doesn’t like kids and you already have 
them, where, exactly, is this relationship going?
Next, ask him about his relationship with his mother. It’s the 
ﬁrst relationship a man has with a woman, and if he has a good 
track record with her, then chances are he knows how to treat 
a woman with respect and has some kind of idea of how to 
profess, provide, and protect not only a woman but a potential 
family, too. I don’t know a boy living whose mother isn’t be-
loved. We learn to protect her and provide for her; we learn 
about the basic core of love for a woman from her. Indeed, if a 
man is at odds with his mother, it’s a safe bet that he’s going to 
be at odds with you. If you hear any part of “Man, me and my 
mother? We just don’t get along . . .” in his answer, erase his 
number and texts from your phone and keep it moving.
After you ﬁnd out how he feels about his mother, ask him 
about his father. If he had a great relationship with his dad, then 
he was probably raised with a core set of values that he’ll bring 
to your potential home together. Now, I understand that a 
whole host of men grew up without fathers in their households, 
but chances are that the man you’re interested in had a male role 
model in his life who showed him the ropes of manhood, or 
perhaps the absence of his own father taught him a few things 
about what he doesn’t want to do when he becomes a father. At 
any rate, ask questions about his relationship with his father, 
and his answers are bound to reveal the kind of father he just 
might turn out to be.
You’re also going to have to ask him about his relationship 
with God. Let me be direct: if you meet a man who doesn’t 
have a relationship with God, he doesn’t go to church and has 
no intention of ever going, and he has no belief system he can 
point to as a guiding force in his life, then it’s a problem. After 
all, what moral barometer does he answer to if not to God? 
What’s going to make him even consider being loyal to you? 
What’s going to make him do right by you and the kids? What’s 
going to make him feel whole? I’m not saying that you shouldn’t 
date a man who doesn’t go to church, or who has a different 
belief system than you. But if his core beliefs don’t match up 
with yours, you’re likely to have a problem.
These next two questions should be asked after you’ve been 
talking and dating for a while. Ideally, ask them before you 
have parted with the cookie (y’all know what I mean). If you 
have already had a sexual encounter with the man, you can ask 
these questions anyway. The answers may hurt a little bit more, 
but at least you’ll know.
Now, this one you’ll have to ask after a few dates, because 
he’s going to need time to get to know you. But his answer will 
be critical because it will reveal to you what his plans for you 
are. If you’ve been out on a  couple of dates and you’ve had lots 
of conversation, you know something about him, but what’s 
more important, you want to know what he is thinking about 
you. You have a right to know. Oh, trust me, he thought some-
thing about you when he ﬁrst walked up to you, and you need 
to know what it is. He was attracted to something—he liked 
your hair, your eyes, your legs, your outﬁt. He didn’t walk over 
there just to be walking. Beyond the initial attraction, however, 
men pretty much know if you’ re the kind of woman they’ re 
going to sleep with and keep it moving, or if they’re going to 
stick around and see if they want more. This, you will be able 
to tell by his answers.
Listen to his answer closely. I assure you this is how it will 
go, because every man will answer this question the same exact 
way: “I think you’re great, I think you’d make a great mom, 
you’re fun, kind, you’re really beautiful, you turn me on, you’r e 
energetic, outgoing, a hard worker, very smart. I think you’re 
the kind of woman I could see myself with,” all of that generic 
stuff we know you want to hear. Still, this isn’t the answer you 
should be looking for. You want speciﬁcs. You want to know 
that he’s really thought about you beyond the surface. So do 
the follow-ups. “Oh, you think I’m kind? What about me 
makes you think I’m kind?” Then sit back and listen. If he 
can’t give you a concrete example of how you’ve shown your 
kindness, he’s not really thinking about you beyond the sur-
face. But if he says, “You remember that time when it was my 
mom’s birthday and you called me and reminded me to pick up 
a card for her? That was really nice.” If he tells you he thinks 
you’re a great mom, make him tell you what it is about you 
that makes you a great mom. And so forth with whatever char-
acteristic he attributes to you. The level of his speciﬁcs wi ll 
give you yet another clue into this man’s intentions for your 
relationship. If he can give you speciﬁcs, it means he’s been 
listening and adding it up—he’s determining if he’s going to 
keep you, if he can see himself in a committed relationship 
with you. And that could mean that you’re at least on the same 
relationship page.
Now this is not to be confused with what do you “think” 
about me—“think” and “feel” are two wholly different things. 
And if a man cannot tell you how he feels about you after a 
month of dating, it’s because he doesn’t feel anything for 
you—he just wants something. Ask a man how he feels about 
you, and he’s going to get confused and nervous: “I told you 
before—I think you’re . . .” he begins. You cut him right off 
and say, “No, no, I want to know how you feel about me.” He 
might shift in his chair, scratch his head, light a cigar—any-
thing to get out of giving you an answer or thinking of what he 
thinks you want him to say. But you’ll have to get him to 
answer it.
Don’t get upset if he doesn’t answer right away: he’s got to 
go into that part of himself that he doesn’t like to go to, and 
that’s the emotional part. Men do not do emotion well, at all, 
and expressing it doesn’t come easy. He can answer questions 
about God and the kids and his mother, but with this question, 
you’re asking him to look into his soul, and our DNA isn’t 
made up for the heartfelt outpouring to just anybody. But this 
doesn’t mean you should let up. What you’re looking for in his 
answer is something like this: “When I don’t see you, I miss 
talking to you, I always wonder what you’re doing and when-
ever you come around, I just feel better—you’re the type of 
woman I’ve been trying to ﬁnd.” In other words, his answer has 
to make you feel wonderful. He may not be in love with you 
just yet, but he’s crazy about you and he’s probably thinking he 
wants to explore a long-term commitment with you, because 
when he starts to profess and put you in a position where he can 
provide for and protect you, he’s seeing a future with you in it. 
And this is exactly where you want to be with this guy.
The “I think you’re cool” answer isn’t going to cut it here, 
ladies. And if, after you’ve asked the question and probed 
deeper, you realize his feelings for you don’t run very deep—
that he’s just not there—then you need to not be there, too. 
Pump the brakes until you start hearing and feeling from him 
the things that you think are important to hear and feel from a 
man with whom you’re willing to forge a relationship.
 W e men are fully aware that we have to answer these ques-
tions, and any real man is going to answer them. You may not 
necessarily like the answers, but he’s going to answer them. If 
he refuses, then don’t bother with him. Don’t think that you’re 
going to work it out later—that you’ll wait him out until he 
gets more comfortable with you—because that would be noth-
ing more than blind hope. Before you know it, you’ll be ﬁnd-
ing out the hard way that this isn’t the guy for you, and you’ll 
be starting all the conversations with your girlfriends like this: 
“You know, I slept with him and he’s not about anything, I 
don’t even know if he likes kids. . . .” Don’t let this happen. 
Empower yourself—it’s your right to know all of these answers 
up front; per my ninety-day rule, which you’ll discover in the 
next chapter, you need to ask these questions within the ﬁrst 
few months of a courtship.
If you’re already in a relationship with someone, these ques-
tions are still valid if you don’t know the answers. You can ask 
them for clariﬁcation. Or you may need to ask them with the 
hope that they’ll solidify what you may already know—either 
that you need to get out of your relationship or that you are 
headed in the right direction. His answers may help you cut 
your losses, before you invest too many more years in a rela-
tionship that isn’t going the way you want it to go. Or they may 
make you say, “Wow, I’m glad I’m with this man.”
Know, too, that though we’ll answer the questions because 
we like talking about ourselves, our answers just may make us 
consider the woman who’s asking the questions in a different 
light. We deﬁnitely want to know where our women stand on 
these issues, too, but we’re not going to bring it up—especially 
if our intentions for you aren’t pure. But in your conversations 
around these issues, your man just might learn something about 
you, too, something that makes him know he’s got a pretty 
solid woman on his side. Say, for instance, he tells you that he 
wants to be an engineer and he’s going to night school to get his 
degree, and you tell him that you have a few friends who are 
engineers and you can offer to introduce him to them so that 
they can give some helpful advice as he works toward his new 
career. When you offer that helping hand, he starts to think, 
“Wow, this woman is interested in my goals and ambitions. 
She’s offering to help me out. Maybe she might be the one to 
get me to the next level.” And he might just envision including 
you in those “next level” plans.
See, you’re getting information from him and plugging 
yourself into all these slots—do I see myself in his short-term 
plans, his long-term plans, as a part of his family, having babies 
with him, helping him continue a solid relationship with his 
mom, being a role-model dad for our kids, the whole picture? 
But it’s a two-way street: know that this guy you’re quizzing is 
listening to these intelligent, inquisitive questions, and calculat-
ing whether you’re a woman who is his keeper or just a sports 
ﬁsh.

11
The Ninety-Day Rule
 Nineteen seventy-seven—it was a good year. I was 
living in Cleveland, I had a two-bedroom apart-
ment, brand spanking new. I hadn’t quite gotten 
the car I wanted, but I was working on it. And I had a job at 
the Ford motor plant. They had a high hourly wage there, and 
overtime—more money than a man of my stature could dream 
of making. But more important, Ford had beneﬁts. Thing is, 
you had to be on the job for a while to get them. Oh, you could 
get a paycheck, but you could not get the beneﬁts; and as far as 
any of the full-time regulars on the line were concerned, you 
were not in until you had the beneﬁts. Ford’s policy was that 
you had to work at least ninety days before they’d cover your 
health insurance; this was the plant management saying to me, 
we will provide you beneﬁts after you have proven to me you 
are worthy—work hard, show up on time, follow your super-
visor’s orders, and get along with your co-workers for ninety 
days, and then you can get dental and medical coverage. You 
can get your eyes checked, no problem. Your hernia could bust  
and we will take care of you. We will take care of your kids’ 
teeth and eyes, and if you’ve got a woman, she can get glasses 
and crowns on her teeth if she needs them, and any more babies 
you have with your lady after this, we’re going to take care of 
them, too. Your whole family will be covered. We are going to 
provide you with a beneﬁt package.
And you know something? All of this made perfect sense to 
me. I was being challenged to show everybody at the plant that 
I was serious, and ready and able to work hard for both the 
salary and the right to have them pay my medical and dental 
expenses—and as a man, I needed and wanted to prove that I 
was up for the challenge and worthy of the reward. I agreed 100 
percent with what the Ford Motor Company was saying to me, 
and so I signed on the dotted line. I wanted to be a part of the 
Ford family.
The ﬁrst day I got paid, the supervisor came through and said, 
“Here’s your check, appreciate you coming.” The check was 
cool, but I wasn’t making an appointment at the doctor’s ofﬁce 
anytime soon. If I got a toothache—hell, if both of my front 
teeth were loose and about to fall clean out of my mouth—there 
wouldn’t be any dentist appointments for ninety days, because 
Ford had already said I had to prove myself to the  people who 
signed the checks in order to get the extras—the perks.
It was a really simple equation: work hard, prove yourself, 
get the beneﬁts.
And guess what? It’s the same way with jobs in the govern-
ment, places like the post ofﬁce, the DMV—and even in some 
corporations. You have got to prove yourself to get the good 
stuff, the extras, the beneﬁts.
So if Ford and the government won’t give a man beneﬁts 
until he’s been on the job and proven himself, why, ladies, are 
you passing out beneﬁts to men before they’ve proven them-
selves worthy? Come on now, you know what the beneﬁts  are. 
I’m not talking about being nice to him, or cooking for him, or 
going out to dinner with him, or helping him pick out an outﬁt, 
or bringing him around your mother. Those are things that 
happen during the course of a budding relationship—you do 
special things for each other because you care. By beneﬁts, in 
case you haven’t ﬁgured it out, I’m talking about sex. And if 
you’re giving your beneﬁts to a guy who’s only been on the job 
for a week or two, you’re making a grave mistake.
You don’t know this man—not much about him, anyway.
He doesn’t know you.
He hasn’t proven himself.
And he could walk off the job at any time.
And you’ll have no one but yourself to blame.
Think about it: the ﬁrst guy you slept with quicker than 
ninety days—where is he? I’m willing to bet that you’re prob-
ably not with him. True, there are some  people out there some-
where who had sex early in the relationship and are still together 
to this very day, but that’s rare. More likely than not, a guy who 
gets beneﬁts early in a relationship, without having to put in 
work or prove himself, leaves and moves on to a committed 
relationship with a woman who puts him through some type of 
probationary period to ﬁnd out more about him. I’m sure that 
woman laid out the rules—the requirements—early on, and let 
her intended know that he could either rise up to those require-
ments, or just move on.
A directive like that signals to a man that you are not a 
plaything—someone to be used and discarded. It tells him that 
what you have—your beneﬁts—are special, and that you need 
time to get to know him and his ways to decide if he  deserves  
them. The man who is willing to put in the time and meet the 
requirements is the one you want to stick around, because that 
guy is making a conscious decision that he, too, has no interest 
in playing games and will do what it takes to not only stay on 
the job, but also get promoted and be the proud beneﬁciary of 
your beneﬁts. And you, in the meantime, win the ultimate 
prize of maintaining your dignity and self-esteem, and earning 
the respect of the man who recognized that you were worth the 
wait.
Of course, you’ve got to use your ninety days wisely; a pro-
bationary period means nothing if you’re not putting this guy 
through the paces. During that ninety-day period, you should 
be checking him out—does he come when he says he’s going to 
come; does he call when he’s going to be late; does he like and 
care about your friends and, if you have them, your children; 
does he express his joy at being in your presence? Most impor-
tant, is this really a man with whom you can see yourself in a 
committed relationship? Or do you see signs that make your 
God-given intuition kick in? You know how it goes: you 
haven’t been invited over to his house, you only have the cell 
phone number, he won’t answer his phone when you’re in the 
room or he takes hushed calls in the corner where you can’t 
hear what’s being said—he tells you he’s dating other women, 
or, somehow, you just know he is. These are tendencies you 
can’t possibly see in a man you’ve dated for less than ninety days 
because guess what? The guy who is dating you just to get the 
beneﬁts up front is going to be on his best behavior in the be-
ginning, speciﬁcally so he can make you think he’s worthy. But 
just as sure as time is going to come and go, he’ll eventually 
show his true nature.
Give it at least ninety days, and you can smoke all of that out 
of him, so that you can be sure that this guy is the right man for 
you. After all, it’s your right to want what you want—and to 
actually get it. Put yourself ﬁrst: ask the ﬁve questions (as men-
tioned in the previous chapter), withhold the beneﬁts, and 
demand the respect. If you have a high level of respect for your-
self, you’re automatically going to command that respect from 
a man. Make him qualify for the beneﬁts, and I guarantee you’ll 
have a better man on your hands—and in your bed. And once 
you’re satisﬁed he’s worthy of the beneﬁts, you can pass it ou t 
like sandwiches at a picnic.
Hold on, I know what you’re thinking: you’re thinking that 
if he doesn’t get sex from you, he’ll go and get it somewhere 
else, and you will have lost out on that one chance to get him 
to be your man—or he’ll think you ’ re playing games if you 
make him wait, and he’ll move on to the next woman who’s 
willing to take him into her bed.
Wrong.
In fact, one of those mind tricks we’ve been playing on 
women since the beginning of time is to convince you all that 
waiting doesn’t matter, that giving it up early and quick is the 
way to go. Listen to me: if we could convince you that you 
should strip naked and get to it within the ﬁrst ﬁve minutes of 
our ﬁrst meeting, we would. This is not a secret: men love and 
want sex, and will try (within reason) to get it by any means 
necessary.
But guess what? He. Can. Wait. Yes, of course you run the 
risk of scaring him off, but isn’t the guy who sleeps with you 
without any obligation to you, or consideration of your wants, 
needs, and emotional well-being, the one you want to go away? 
Isn’t reserving something that special for a man who earns it 
more of a beneﬁt to you ? You have the power to make him wait —
to prove to you that he deserves your love and affection. The 
Power. Just think of it this way: when it comes to having sex 
with a woman, we men don’t decide a thing. We don’t deter-
mine when w e ’ re going to sleep with y ou—that decisi on is 
yours. The decision of when we get to kiss you is yours. When 
we let go of each other’s hug and embrace? That decision is 
yours. We put our hands somewhere on your body other than 
your shoulder and you decide if we can keep touching that place 
or if we gotta let it go. Our job is to convince you to give it to 
us—to allow us to touch it, let us have it. But the decision on 
whether we actually get to have it is Y.O.U.R.S.
Don’t give up that power. Keep it. You only give up that 
power when the man has earned it, and he is going to respect it 
and do something with it.
That’s the truth.
Women have crumbled empires with that power. Cleopatra 
helped destroy Rome. Read your Bible: we’re still in a jam 
right now because of Eve. Women have always had that kind of 
power, and you do, too—including making the man you’re 
dating wait for the beneﬁts. Oh, I’m not saying you can’t pay 
the man; payment comes along the way during that ninety-day 
probationary period. You can hug, kiss, talk on the phone, go 
for a walk in the park, have an ice cream cone together, go out 
for dinner. Your time is a form of payment. When we’re out to 
dinner with you, you can’t imagine how we feel when we’re 
looking forward to meeting you and you show up with your lip 
gloss shining, your eyes seductively made up, and your hair—
whether it’s blown out, in a weave, or natural—is lovely, and 
your body gleaming. I cannot tell you the fulﬁllment we have 
in knowing that we’ve secured your time. And to be seen in 
public with you is a bonus; it’s all the afﬁrmation we need. The 
payment is incredible.
Hugging? Payment.
Kissing? Payment.
You getting dressed up? Payment.
Going out with us? Payment.
Exchanging explicit e-mails? Payment.
But if he wants to sleep with you—make babies and have a 
family? Those are beneﬁts.
So he’s got ninety days on the job to prove himself worthy—
ninety days in which you can ﬁgure this man out. You’re an 
investigator—can’t nobody ﬁnd stuff out like a woman. Y’all 
put the police to shame, make the little investigative tricks they 
show on CSI and Law & Order: SVU  look like counting lessons 
on Sesame Street . You know how to ﬁnd stuff out about a man 
he may not have even known about himself. So get to it. Create 
some scenarios so you can ﬁgure out just who this guy is, and 
whether he’s good enough for your beneﬁts. Here are a few 
things you might want to ﬁnd out.
Maybe your car broke down, or the water heater is about to 
give its last breath, or your kids are acting up and you can’t get 
a handle on them. You’re exhausted and the stress is showing on 
your face—he can hear it in your voice. If he asks you, “What’s 
the matter?” that’s a good start. He’s been around you long 
enough to know when you’re not your normal self. That’s prog-
ress. But now, if you answer him with, “My car broke down and 
I don’t have the money to ﬁx it right now so I’m just a little 
worried about how I’m going to get to work tomorrow,” and he 
says, “Okay, well, call me when you ﬁgure it out,” you can 
scratch him off the beneﬁts list. Be clear: you’re not asking him 
for money to get the car ﬁxed. You’re just trying to see if he’s 
going to probe deeper, and ﬁnd out if there’s anything he can do 
to help, whether it’s to give you some advice on how to ﬁx the 
problem, or step in to help you ﬁx it. Did he offer to get up an 
hour earlier so he could drive you to work while your car is in 
the shop? Or give you the number to a guy who can ﬁx your car 
for a deep discount? Did he offer to get up under the hood and 
take a look himself? Or tell you about his friend who owns a car 
shop and might be willing to do a favor for him—and you?
Real men extend themselves to women they care about. If you 
have a problem and your man does not extend himself—he doesn’t 
try to make it better—this is not a good candidate for beneﬁts.
Now that other man, the one who’ll scoot on the ground on 
his back with the toolbox, and come back out hours later with 
car grease all over his shirt and hands and face from trying to 
ﬁx your raggedy car? That’s the one who might deserve a cold 
beer and later on, some beneﬁts.
Let’s say an ex of yours is starting to call again, and it’s making 
you uncomfortable because the breakup was particularly nasty 
and you just don’t want to go down that road with him again. 
You tell the new guy you’re bothered by this and are not sure 
how to make the ex just go away. A beneﬁts-worthy man will 
immediately launch into “ﬁx-it” mode—he will see what he can 
do to (a) stop the guy from calling, and (b) get you to feel safe 
again. He might tell you something like, “Next time he calls, let 
me talk to him.” That’s a little extreme, but there are some men 
who will get on the line and let the last ex know to mind his 
place. Or your new man may give you suggestions for how to 
deal with the unwanted phone calls; he might tell you to block 
his number or put a special ring on the phone so you know who 
it is when the phone rings, maybe even give you a few words to 
say to this guy to make him stop calling. This is a pressure situ-
ation; it doesn’t require an action, but a reaction. If the new guy 
says something like, “I just can’t get into all of this,” then he’s 
not a good candidate for beneﬁts. You’re going to be in pressure 
situations in y our relationship time and time again, and y ou  
should know up front, right now, if this guy is ready to handle 
it. If he goes into protect or ﬁx-it mode, then he envisions you 
as his woman. And he just might be worth the beneﬁts.
Say you lose a loved one—someone really close to you. A 
man who has plans for you will immediately offer some form of 
comfort and help so that you can take the time to grieve. He 
might ask you if he can take your kids out for a  couple of hours 
so you can have some time to yourself, or he might ask you if 
he can go with you to the funeral home to be with you while 
you see about the funeral arrangements, and so that he can ex-
press his condolences to your family. Note, ladies, he’s probably 
not going to want to sit there and let you retrace your child-
hood and reminisce about the ﬁrst time your deceased loved 
one pushed you on the swing; that’s not about to happen—it’s 
not what men do. But a real man will respond with some kind 
of solution—he will do what he can to help you stop crying, 
because no man wants to see his woman crying. If this man is 
not comforting—if he’s not coming up with some solutions to 
help you feel better, then he needs to be ﬁred. He has no rights 
to the beneﬁts.
A man who is worthy of the beneﬁts will be there for you no 
matter what bad circumstance comes along. If you lose your job 
or fall behind on some payments because you had a huge and 
unexpected ﬁnancial situation to deal with, he’ll recognize your 
need for help and rise to the occasion, whether it’s giving you a 
little extra cash to make the minimum payment on your bills, 
stopping by with a few bags of groceries, or ﬁlling your gas 
tank.
Let’s just get right to the crux of this whole chapter: when a 
man asks for sex, and he is told no, his reaction to that no will 
tell you everything you need to know about him. If the phone 
calls cease or become infrequent, the ﬂowers stop coming, the 
dating slows down, please understand that this man was just in 
it for the sex. If he says something stupid, such as, “I don’t need 
to wait for sex—I can get it from anybody,” you tell him right 
back, “Please do.” This cuts the riffraff away right away. But if 
your saying no doesn’t deter him, and he continues to try to ge t 
to know you better and prove to you that he’s worthy of your 
beneﬁts, then he’s really, truly interested in you. Don’t get me 
wrong: he’s still interested in the sex. But he’s also interested in 
knowing how you feel and what time frame you’re working on. 
Then the relationship becomes about what you want—what 
your needs are. And that’s what you’re after, right?
It’s that simple.
Now, I realize that ninety days sounds like a lot of time and 
you kinda need to be real creative to keep his attention on you 
and your new relationship. So I came up with a list of things 
you can do with your man to help you—and him—stay focused 
on the relationship.
 Go on dates that help you ﬁnd out each other’s 
interests: if he’s into photography, hit up a 
photography exhibit at the local museum; if you’re 
into cooking, take a cooking class together.
 Host a barbecue at your house and invite him to  
meet your friends and family; a good guy should be 
comfortable meeting the  people you love.
 Go to church together; know that he’s interested.
 Sign up for a sexy Latin dance class so you can learn 
some new moves—it’ll show you if he’s into trying 
new things, and you can tell if the man has, um, 
rhythm.
 Go out for a picnic in the park with the kids; see if 
he’s comfortable with them.
 Find out each other’s favorite artists and attend a 
concert together.
 Release your inner kid and spend an evening playing 
games at an arcade.
 Have a few “ﬁrsts” together—go horseback riding 
together, or hit up a batting cage, or fall all over each 
other at the ice skating rink.
 Volunteer together—help out at a local soup kitchen 
or read books to kids at a local foster home; you can 
tell a lot about a man who’s willing to help others.
 Rent a convertible and get lost cruising in your city; 
you’ll have plenty of time to talk on a long drive.
 Find a quiet place where you can watch the sunset 
together.
 Play a board game.
 Go for a long walk under a starlit sky.
 Send each other naughty e-mails, so he can be sure 
that when he does get it, it’s going to be good. (And 
you can make sure he’s literate while you’re at it.)
 Read a passage out of each other’s favorite books.
 Have a movie night in which you both bring your 
favorite DVDs.
 Go to a record store and listen to each other’s favorite 
artists.
 Challenge each other to do something silly, like build 
a sandcastle at the beach or a game of jacks or marbles.
 Hit up a comedy show; you can learn a lot about a 
person by what they ﬁnd funny and what they think 
is offensive.

12
If He’s Meeting the Kids 
After You Decide He’s “the One,” 
It’s Too Late
 Let’s get one thing straight. When a man approaches you, 
he doesn’t see anything except what’s in front of him—
how you’re ﬁtting into your jeans, what the shape of 
your leg looks like in those heels, how your lips look with that 
lip gloss shining, how beautiful your eyes are with all those 
colors around them. We don’t care if you use M.A.C or Bobbi 
Brown, Maybelline or L ’Oréal. We don’t care anything about 
where you live, who you used to be with, what kind of car 
you’re driving, how much money you’re making and spending, 
or even who you’re spending it on. And we especially don’t 
consider whether you have kids and what that would mean if 
we were in a relationship with you. In fact, if we’re about gam e 
and our game goes right, we never make it to the kids; we 
ﬁgure we’re going to have dinner a  couple of times, maybe 
catch a movie or go bowling, and be in a room with a bed frame 
and a mattress in it in a matter of days if our game is proper, or 
a few weeks if you’re playing hard to get. Kids? Please. Some 
men don’t care any which way about your kids. The guy you’re 
trying to hook up with won’t be any more interested in your 
life as a mother than what color toenail polish you’ll ask for at 
your next pedicure appointment. In fact, if a guy is in it for o ne 
thing—if he’s a game runner looking for nothing more than 
your cookie—then the plan is to never meet the kids . And once 
he gets what he was looking for, oh, you can believe he’ll be 
plotting how to move on.
Wh a t ’ s  m o s t  li k e l y  t o  h a p p e n  i s  y o u ’ll  f o ll o w  t h e  t i m e -  
honored single mom tradition of dating a guy, all the while 
keeping him as far away from your home life as possible—partl y 
because you want to get clarity on the relationship and the di-
rection in which it’s moving, partly because you don’t want to 
introduce your kids to any man unless you’re absolutely, 100 
percent sure that he’s in it for the long haul. Once you’ve con-
vinced yourself there’s long-term potential with the guy in 
question, then you invite him home to meet the kids.
Stop right there.
I’m here to tell you that you’re going about this all the way 
wrong. You can’t become emotionally attached to this man and 
make some kind of verbal or, especially, physical commitment 
to him, and then ﬁnally drag him to the house only to ﬁnd out 
he doesn’t like your kids, and your kids don’t like him. You’ve 
gone and got this guy all hot and bothered thinking you’re 
some sexy vixen who’s fun and interesting and wild and willing 
and able to swing from chandeliers, and once you walk into 
your living room, he’s tripping over Tonka trucks and mashing 
crayons into the carpet while your kids are begging for potato 
chips, crying loudly, and telling you the baby’s diaper needs 
changing? This is not a good situation, ladies. Not a good situ-
ation at all. In fact, the introduction is late—much too late.
See, a man needs to be able to see what all he’s going to be 
responsible for up front; if he sees you in the role as a mother, 
he’s going to immediately try to ﬁgure out if he sees himself in 
the role as a father. He’s going to evaluate if he can afford those 
children, if he wants to be bothered with the drama that comes 
when a baby’s daddy is likely lurking in the background, whether 
he can handle any animosity that might come his way when the 
kids get wind of him, and, ﬁnally, if he wants to play second 
ﬁddle to the children, whose needs you surely will meet many 
moons before his—all of these things and then some will be 
taken into account. And if you hold back key information he 
needs to assess his potential life together with you, and pop it 
on him when he’s not expecting it, he’s not going to receive the 
information well—plain and simple. In fact, he’s likely to think 
he was duped—duped into thinking he had one woman, when 
clearly he’s involved with someone who comes with a whole 
different set of obligations, responsibilities, and potential re-
quirements. (Note: Telling him you have kids is not good 
enough.)
Besides that, the longer you hold off introducing him to the 
kids, the more he’s going to think there’s something wrong 
with them—that you’re hiding the kids for a reason. And that 
will only make him more apprehensive about that initial meet-
ing; in his mind, you will have elevated the get-together to the 
level of a G8 summit, giving the introduction way more power 
than it needs or deserves. He’s meeting the kids, for goodness’ 
sake—they’re not sitting down to a state dinner at the White 
House.
So, to avoid all of this, you need to get the kids in the game 
early; a natural, casual introduction early in the relationship 
will set all of you up for a much healthier connection. He should 
be sitting across the room or at the park or at the ice cream 
parlor with those kids right around the time you start develop-
ing emotional feelings for this guy beyond “I’m attracted to 
him.” If you’re starting to wonder whether this guy is right for 
you, then you might as well see if he’s right for the kids. Let 
him see you and them in your natural setting—in a mother-
child capacity. He should see you feeding oatmeal and fruits to 
the toddler, and braiding the seven-year-old’s hair, and folding 
the ten-year-old’s laundry, and cheering the ﬁfteen-year-old on 
during football practice. He’ll be looking at all of these things 
to determine what kind of mother you are, and whether he’d 
like to have you be the mother of his children. This is hugely 
important, ladies, because we men recognize that some women 
aren’t cut out to be mothers—that there’s no automatic mother-
ing gene that kicks in for women just because she has the equip-
ment to carry and birth babies. Just as some women can’t drive, 
just as some women can’t do math, just as some women can’t 
cook, some women aren’t good at mothering. And a guy wants 
to see that the potential mother of his children is at least decent 
at it, that she can be kind, compassionate, creative, and stern. 
He wants to see that you can handle matters without unravel-
ing—that the stress that comes with marriage and family is 
something you can handle with decent skill—because the one 
thing we men do know is that marriage and family equals stress. 
So we’re looking—looking to see if you can handle having to 
make dinner for the kids, while helping one with the home-
work, tending to the other who’s had the ﬂu for a week, helping 
one get on the Internet, and kicking the other off the Internet’s 
inappropriate sites, all at the same time, without strangling 
anybody.
More important, you should introduce the kids to the man 
you’re dating so that you can see him in a fatherly capacity. 
Walk him into your house, introduce him to little Taylor and 
Brianna, and then sit back and observe; you will get the purest 
and truest reaction from him when you do this. If he actually 
knows something about kids and likes them, he’ll be able to 
start and hold a conversation with a six-year-old; the biggest 
test of someone’s children skills is whether they can talk to kids 
in a way that will keep them engaged and elicit a response. If he 
freezes up and acts like he’s on the witness stand—he just can’t 
think of anything to say or ask—then chances are his intense 
reaction is a sign he’s just not all that good with children. Simi-
larly, if he’s completely defenseless against the powers of the 
wicked little kids who are liked by no one but their mother, 
then that’s a potential problem, too. The guy who can’t hold his 
own in those situations—who can’t use humor or compassion 
or square his shoulders in a take-charge way to deﬂect any at-
tempts by the kids to do damage or harm to him—may have 
some issues, too. After all, you want your potential man to be 
able to be, well, a man around your kids—someone who can 
take charge when the kids act like fools and they need a man to 
set them straight. Kids, after all, respect authority.
All of this, of course, will tell you a lot about this guy—
about the kind of father he’d be. If he’s comfortable with the 
kids, can entertain as well as give them advice, and give you 
solid advice on how to troubleshoot, too, then he’s showing you 
the traits of a potentially good father ﬁgure for your child. Like-
wise, when he sees you with your children—nurturing them, 
feeding them, and keeping all of their needs satisﬁed, you’re 
showing him not only that you’re a good mother to your own 
children, but that you’re potential mother material for any chil-
dren he already has, and any babies you two might make 
together.
Sure, how your kids feel about this guy should count for 
something, too. Children have an uncanny ability to pick up on 
w h e n  h u m a n  b e i n g s  m e a n  t h e m  w e l l  o r  h a r m ;  i f  t h e y ’ r e  
younger, they have no ulterior motives about not liking some-
one, especially if you introduce him as “my friend Mr. So-and-
So,” just like you would any female friend of yours. But know, 
too, that if your child’s father is in your kid’s life, your child 
may not necessarily have the most warm and fuzzy feelings 
about the new guy—and that’s natural. In these cases, your 
child isn’t exactly going to make it easy for the new man to get 
close quickly. But this isn’t necessarily going to scare a man off. 
(First off, how would a grown man look being scared off by a 
child? If he runs, let him.) Oh, the new guy might raise an 
eyebrow or two if he keeps running into problems with Little 
Chucky—if on the ﬁrst date, Chucky forgoes a handshake for a 
swift kick to the shin, and on the second date, the little monster 
purposely rides his bicycle up the side of the new man’s ride, 
and on the third date, he “accidentally” spills his fruit punch all 
over your man’s nice white linen suit. But if you’re worth it, 
he’s going to stick it out and see if Chucky is truly insane, or if 
he simply keeps catching him on his bad days. He’ll try harder 
to win Chucky over, and give the relationship more time to 
assess whether Chucky is bearable.
And teenagers? Oh, men don’t even see them as a problem; 
no man walks into a situation thinking they’re going to be best 
friends with the teenager in the house. Even their biological 
parents can’t stand teenagers, and vice versa, sometimes, so the 
odds are low that the new man is going to have a kumbaya 
moment with a sulking, hulking, attitudinal older child. The 
beauty of teenagers, though, is that they tend to make them-
selves invisible. As a result, your new man might actually be 
able to focus on your relationship without the distraction of a 
misbehaving kid. But a man who genuinely wants to be in your 
life will try to be a part of your teenager’s life—he won’t be 
deterred. He’s expecting that a teenager will be a jerk to him. 
What he’ll try to determine is whether the jerkiness is an act to 
be mean, or if that’s truly who this kid is.
Now, we all understand your need as a mother to protect the 
emotions of your children and your reluctance to let them get  
attached to someone you can’t guarantee won’t disappear and 
take your kids’ hearts with him. Likewise, we understand how 
important it is for you to not look like you’re fast and loose, 
running men all through the house like your living room is a 
bus stop. W e also know this violates every single rule you’ve  
had hammered into your head about such introductions. But 
my goodness, I’m not talking about bringing everybody to the 
house. I’m talking about the guy that you think might be seri-
ous about you. And don’t worry about whether he’s going to 
think you’re trying to trap him or you’re just looking for some 
sucker to take up where your kids’ daddy failed. Single moms 
all over the planet have convinced themselves, with their natu-
ral instincts as nurturers and protectors in full gear, that bring-
ing men they’ve just met around the kids is unsafe. But, ladies, 
here’s a secret: that’s exactly what the players who wrote the 
rule book you’ve been following want you to believe. Women 
live under that fear because the men intent on playing the game 
tricked you into thinking this way; as long as you believe it, we 
get to keep the game alive until we get what we want, without 
any obligations.
If you really want a good man in your life, if you’ve asked God 
to give you a family, you’ve got to stop all this foolishness and 
introduce this man to your kids so you can ﬁgure him out. The 
sincere men among us know that women with kids are a pack-
age deal, and we’ll understand that you are a mother with obli-
gations to your kids ﬁrst, especially if you lay that out up front. 
Tell us straight up: “I’m not just looking for a mate for myself; 
I’m trying to form a union with a man who will be willing to 
be the head of this family.” You know what a declaration such 
as that is? That, sweetheart, is a requirement. You’ve told him 
in a nice, not-so-subtle-but-sweet way that the only way a man 
is going to be a part of your life is if he agrees to be a part of 
your children’s lives, too. A real man is going to be okay with 
that because you’ve told him that if he’s going to be a part of 
your life, you and the kids are a package deal, and that he will 
get dismissed quickly if you feel like he’s not right for or good 
to the kids. With that information, with your requirements so 
clearly laid out, he’s going to either run for the hills, or try to 
ﬁgure out how to make this thing work. Go ahead, invite him 
to come with you and the kids to the zoo, or invite him over to 
your mom’s house for a family barbecue. See what he says—
what he does. If he says, “Nah, I ain’t going over there, I got to 
watch Monday Night Football, ” and it’s Saturday, then guess 
what? He’s probably not the one for you. Usually, how a rela-
tionship starts is a good sign of how it’s going to end up, and if 
a man starts out not interested in your family, what makes you 
think that after you sleep with him, he’s going to suddenly de-
velop an affection for your family? But if he brings a game of 
Scrabble or Monopoly over to the house and sits down on the 
ﬂoor and plays for an hour or he invites you and your family to 
join him on an outing, then he just might be a keeper.
For those of you who are thinking strictly from a safety 
standpoint, please know that I’m not telling you to bring a man 
you hardly know into your house and leave him sitting there 
with your kids, unsupervised. Of course, when someone you’re  
just getting to know is in your home near your kids, you’ re 
going to sit there the whole time, watching. What’s he going to 
do—touch your daughter on the thigh while you’re sitting on 
the couch right next to her? Or put your son in a choke hold at 
the dinner table? Be realistic: no man is going to walk in your 
house and abuse anyone with you sitting nearby. And if you’re 
that concerned about bringing a man into your house, you can 
always go to a public place—somewhere where plenty of  people 
will be able to eyeball what’s going on and give a detailed ac-
counting to the authorities if he steps out of line and you have 
to chop him in the neck.
For those of you who are dating men with children, don’t 
expect him to introduce the kids early, necessarily, because 
wherever his child is, most likely his child’s mother isn’t too far 
away. And the last thing he needs or wants is for his kid to run 
back to his ex talking about the “nice lady” Daddy had over to 
the house; next thing you know, his ex is laying down the new 
custody terms, which do not include having her baby around 
any strange woman she hasn’t previously ran a background 
check on and authorized, especially if that woman is trying to 
lay up in her ex’s house. So a man with children from a previ-
ous relationship recognizes he needs to ration out the female 
encounters with his kids if he wants to try to keep a modicum 
of peace with his ex and actually see his kids again. If you’re not 
somebody he’s trying to have around for any amount of time, 
he’s not going to waste his “girl-encounter ration” on you, 
knowing that you’re not worth the grief he’s going to suffer 
when his children go back and tell their mommy he had a 
woman in the house. He’s decided in his mind you’re not 
worth it.
If he asks you to meet the kids, thereby using one of his girl-
encounter rations, be sure of this: he’s decided you’re worth  the 
pain he’ll have to suffer when the ex hears about it.
How will he let you know which category you ﬁt in? If 
after, say, your ﬁfth date he’s still telling you, “By the way, we 
have to go out on Sunday because this Saturday is my time with 
the kids and it’s the only time I have with them, so . . .” then he 
doesn’t want you around them—he’s telling you you’re not 
worth the potential headache. But if he says something like “I 
got the kids this Saturday, how about we go to the beach or the 
park?” then he’s thinking he can ﬁgure out how to deal with 
the ex later—right now, he wants nothing more than to be with 
you and the kids.
Want to smoke out whether he’s got “good father” potential 
or not? The following list isn’t foolproof, but it will certainly 
give you some food for thought about the things you should be 
taking into account as you consider whether this man is right 
for your kids—or if you should take the kids and run in the 
other direction.
 He tells you he likes kids, and actually would like to 
have one someday.
 He expresses interest in meeting your children.
 He shows up to the house with gifts—for the kids. 
(Of course, if he brings an Xbox for Mikey and 
disappears for a few hours, then that might be a 
problem.)
 He lets the children see that he sincerely respects 
and likes (and even loves) their mother.
 He makes a kid-friendly date with you and invites 
your children along.
 He takes you and the kids to church.
 He has a good job and a solid work history.
 He’s kind to his mother and checks in with her often 
(but mama’s boys need not apply).
 His nieces and nephews spend considerable time with 
him.
 He has younger siblings he helped care for when he 
was younger—and they made it through, unscathed.
 He has a pet, and it actually gets fed and taken care of.
 He keeps his house clean and knows how to cook a 
few decent meals.
 He’s ﬁnancially prepared to care for you and your 
children, or he has the desire to.
 He can and is willing to comfort your child when she 
hurts herself. (If he starts hyperventilating at the sight 
of blood, this might be a situation—especially if he’s 
already told you he’s a doctor.)
 He doesn’t  faint at the sight of diapers.
 He can get down and dirty with your children—
squirting them with a water hose, shooting hoops at 
the park, getting buried in the sand at the beach—and 
like it. (Though you don’t want him to get too excited 
about playing “Tea Party” with the dolls.)
 He doesn’t lose his mind when someone spills food 
and drinks in his car, or puts a muddy footprint on 
the back of his seat—it shows he’s not so fussy about 
messy kids (because nothing wrecks your car quicker 
than having kids; his seats will see the inside of a 
Happy Meal).
 He can make it through a one-on-one game with your 
child and maybe even let him win once (Note: dunking 
on an eight-year-old and yelling, “In your face!” is not 
something a good potential father would do).
 He’s willing and able to teach you how to play a 
sport—which shows he has the patience of Job.
 He’s willing to go to family functions with you and 
the kids—even after hearing the stories about your 
crazy aunt Thelma and how she likes to get a little 
tipsy and call out your new boyfriends in front of 
company.
 He’s actually interested in how your child is doing in 
school, and not only encourages him to do well, but 
gives suggestions on how he can excel.
 He can be gentle with your kids, but he’s capable of 
being ﬁrm with them, too (though you don’t want to 
see him start taking off his belt within the ﬁrst half 
hour of meeting the children; I know kids can be bad, 
but that’s a little much).
 He’s capable of forgiveness, and shows that, even 
when your kid does the seemingly unforgivable— 
or at least the highly questionable.

13
Strong, Independent— 
and Lonely— 
Women
 A world without women would go a little something like 
this:
Men wouldn’t wash or shave.
We wouldn’t work.
Our wardrobe would be pretty simple: sweats, T-shirts, and 
socks—maybe some sneakers if we absolutely had to go 
outside.
There’d deﬁnitely be no need for dishes or vegetables or 
much food for that matter—a paper plate or two, some cold 
cuts, pizza, and beer would do just ﬁne.
Furniture in the house would be kept to a minimum: we’d 
have a recliner, a refrigerator, a really big television, and, of 
course, a remote.
We’d need only two television channels: ESPN and ESPN2.
And we wouldn’t need to go on vacation—we’d just go to 
Vegas. They’ve got everything we need in Vegas—you can 
gamble there, smoke cigars, eat steak, play golf, and go to the 
strip club, and really, you wouldn’t need that “what happens in 
Vegas stays in Vegas” slogan because men wouldn’t go blabbing 
about what they did, anyway.
This is all to say that men are very simple creatures who would 
be prone to doing some very simple things if not for the women in 
our lives. After all, you all are the masters of “handling it”: you 
work full-time, then come home to the full-time job of being 
wives and mothers and everything to everybody; you’re raising 
kids (all too many of you without any help from the men who 
helped create them); you’re making most of the major purchasing 
decisions in our households; you’re taking over key positions in the 
corporate world and bringing home the bacon (some of you more 
than the men in your lives); you’re excelling in college, where you 
outnumber young men at a ridiculous rate; and you’re holding up 
our churches and educating our children in the school system, in 
effect, nurturing and protecting our minds and spirits. We men 
welcome and appreciate this more than you ever will know (mainly 
because we’re a little too proud sometimes to ’fess up to it).
Still, the strength it takes to “handle it” is not, in a man’s 
mind, where a woman’s power lies. To us, your power comes 
from one simple thing: you’re a woman, and we men will do 
anything humanly possible to impress you so that, ultimately, 
we can be with you. You’re the driving force behind why we 
wake up every day. Men go out and get jobs and hustle to make 
money because of women. We drive fancy cars because of 
women. We dress nice, put on cologne, get haircuts and try to 
look all shiny and new for you. We do all of this because the 
more our game is stepped up, the more of you we get.
You’re the ultimate prize to us.
This may be a hard pill for you to swallow and some of you 
may be offended by what I’m about to say, but I say this in truth 
and an abiding love for the opposite sex: somewhere along the 
way, women lost sight of this. Maybe in part because we men 
have played so many games, pulled so many tricks out of our 
hats—just plain done so much wrong in our quest to get 
women—that we’ve convinced you all that you are not impor-
tant to us. Perhaps it has to do with how women are raised 
these days—there’s been the constant encouragement from your 
mothers and aunties and grandmas and female mentors to edu-
cate yourselves and get great jobs and to be independent women, 
no matter the cost, even if it means putting off having serious 
relationships. Or maybe you all have just been worn down by 
the constant media obsession with perfection, with everything 
from magazine covers to television shows, to commercials, and 
blogs, and everything else telling you to nip it and tuck it and 
suck it in and dress it up and look like Halle Berry and Beyoncé 
if you want to attract a good man, knowing full well that all of 
you possess a great beauty all your own, and only Halle can 
look like Halle, and only Beyoncé can look like Beyoncé.
Whatever the case, we men are no longer connecting with 
that special part of you that makes you a woman—that thing 
that makes you so very beautiful to us, and that also happens to 
make us feel more like men. As I’ve already explained, the thr ee 
ways a man shows you he loves you is by professing, providing, 
and protecting. Which means that if you’ve got your own 
money, your own car, your own house, a Brinks alarm system, 
a pistol, and a guard dog, and you’re practically shouting from 
the rooftops that you don’t need a man to provide for you or 
protect you, then we will see no need to keep coming around. 
What in the world do you need us for if you have all of that?
Don’t misunderstand what I’m saying here. We don’t mind 
it if you have yourself totally together—you can have your ow n 
house, you can have your own money, you can own your own 
car. You can have the Brinks alarm system, the guard dog, and 
the pistol, too. But if the man who is pursuing your affection is 
never allowed by you to exhibit his ability to provide or pro-
tect, then how can he possibly see himself professing his love to 
a woman who has not allowed him to feel like a man? The 
things you’ve acquired and gained ﬁnancially and educationally 
can never be bigger than the relationship with the man. His 
DNA will not allow for that. Translation: we appreciate it when 
women treat us like men, when you let us know that you need 
us. The need to feel needed is way bigger to us than we’ve let 
on; we have to feel needed by you in order to fulﬁll our destiny 
as a man.
Of course, I’ve heard women say, “I’m not going to belittle 
myself to make him feel more like a man—if he can’t handle 
my money and my success and my independence, then he can’t 
handle me!” We understand and can handle strong women. In 
fact, we’re the products of strong women—women who “handle 
it.” It’s no secret that you allow us men to believe we’re the 
head of the household, but it’s you who makes all the key deci-
sions in the house and with the kids. It’s no secret to us that no 
matter who’s bringing in the most money, it’s you who ulti-
mately handles the ﬁnances and allocates how the cash is going 
to be spent. It’s no secret that when we argue, we may act like 
we’re right, but we know that ultimately, if we want to restore 
the peace, you’re going to get your way. We’re cool with all of 
this. But if you say things to this effect without keeping up the 
charade of our being essential to the household or you handle 
our egos with anything less than great care—then we’re not 
going to want to be involved with you. In our minds, if you’ve 
got your own money, you don’t need ours. If you know karate 
and can knock somebody ﬂat on his behind by yourself, then 
you don’t need our protection. And if we can’t exercise two of 
the major components that make up who we are as men—
providing and protecting—then we’re not about to profess our 
love for you. We absolutely will not say, “I’m your man” if you 
don’t let us fulﬁll who we are. What will end up happening 
instead? We’ll sleep with you and then walk away.
It’s the hard truth, but that’s real.
When I was a young man, I was in a relationship with a 
woman who I thought I loved. I had dropped out of college and 
was in between jobs, just starting to ﬁnd my way as a comedian. 
She was an enormous help to me; I was struggling, and she was 
holding it down for us ﬁnancially, I admit, but I thought I was 
more than making up for my lack of cash by being all I could 
be around the house—doing what was necessary to keep our 
home in order. See, that’s what being in a real relationship is all 
about—ﬁnding that balance, even in the midst of adversity. 
And adversity will come. Those wedding vows they make you 
say? The preacher makes you say them because he and every-
one else who’s ever been married knows what’s coming. For 
better or for worse? Worse is coming. In sickness and in health? 
Somebody is going to get sick. For richer or for poorer? Some-
body might end up broke, temporarily laid off. Hard times 
will certainly come. The question is, how are you going to 
deal with it?
This was made clear to a friend of mine one particular day 
when he went grocery shopping. His woman was loading up 
the cart with everything she needed for the house—the meats, 
the vegetables, the fruits, the drinks, and everything. And then 
they turned down the aisle with the pineapple juice. Now one 
thing you need to know about my friend—he loves pineapple 
juice. Steak with pineapple juice—I can’t tell you which is 
better to him. And when they turned down that aisle, the ﬁrst 
thing he put his hand on during that entire grocery store trip 
was a bottle of pineapple juice. He didn’t think anything of it—
just grabbed a bottle and dropped it into the cart. She had her 
back turned when he did it, but when she turned around and 
saw the pineapple juice in there on the pile of groceries, she 
snatched it out and said, “What is this?”
“Pineapple juice,” he said simply.
“And who put this pineapple juice in the basket?” she 
asked.
“Well, I did,” he said, a little confused. Who else in the 
world would have put a bottle of pineapple juice into their 
cart?
“You,” she practically spit, “don’t have any money.”
And then she did the unthinkable: she took that bottle of 
pineapple juice and purposely dropped it on the ﬂoor; it hit the 
tile with the loudest crash, and broke into what looked like a 
million little pieces of shiny glass shards and yellow liquid—all 
of it just inches away from their feet. She glanced at it, then gave 
him the eye, and pushed the grocery cart on—away from the 
mess and him.
He walked out the store and waited for her; when she ﬁnally 
came out, he loaded the groceries into the car with tears in his 
eyes. You just can’t imagine how that hurt him. He knew he 
didn’t have any money, but all he wanted was a damn bottle of 
pineapple juice, and in that singular act, in that one moment , 
his lady shoved into his face that she didn’t consider him to be 
a man. It was more important to her in that moment to prove 
what he already knew—that he wasn’t fulﬁlling his role as a 
provider. I’m not suggesting that she didn’t have the right to 
have a man who was pulling his weight. But if she knew him—
and men—she would have understood that making him feel 
less than a man wasn’t going to get her what she needed and 
wanted out of her man. Her actions were only going to drive 
him away.
Not long after, he left her.
And that is pretty much the reaction you can expect from 
men in similar situations where a woman makes more than her 
partner and she rubs that fact in his face. Will he be intimidated 
by your money and your success? Of course. Because you’re 
taking him out of his role as a man—to be the provider. It’s 
what society expects of him, and really, what you’ve been 
taught to expect of men, too—that he be able to sweep you up 
and take care of you. Sure, when a man is young and doesn’t 
know any better, he’s busy being all this other stuff he thinks 
ﬁts into what it means to be a man: dating an excess of women; 
recklessly spending his money on things he doesn’t really need, 
much less can afford; using his muscle instead of his brain in his 
quest to appear tough. But most of us grow out of this eventu-
ally, and when we do, we recognize that a real man provides for 
the ones he loves. Even a male convict will sit behind bars and 
tell you, “The ﬁrst thing I’m going to do when I get out of here 
is take care of my family and get a job—that’s all I want to do.” 
Most every man comes to that realization. Some men never 
come out of the ignorance and die fools—alone. But for the 
most part, when we get around other men and try to validate 
our manhood, it’s not about how many women we’ve got, but 
who we’re taking care of.
We are trained to be providers for you, and you are trained 
to look for that in us. So the moment that order of things is 
thrown off, the relationship is out of sync. If a woman also has 
the bad habit of throwing a man’s deﬁciencies in his face, then 
he has a problem of a whole different magnitude. He’s going to 
struggle with not being the provider and she’s going to feel like 
his ego is getting in the way of her happiness. And everyone 
involved is bound to get—and be—miserable.
So how do we get through this situation?
Don’t give up your money, or your job, or your education, 
or the pride and dignity that come with all of that.
Just be a lady.
Oh, I can hear the collective teeth sucking—it’s as loud as a 
police siren and helicopter whir in Compton—I can see the 
universal arm folding and eyebrow raising as well. But your 
getting hot and bothered by what I’m saying isn’t going to 
change the fact that men, no matter what their ﬁnancial situa-
tion, background, social status, or backstory, want their women 
to let them take care of them. And I say to you deﬁant ones, go 
ahead and act like this isn’t important if you want to, but the 
women who accept that it’s okay to let the guy take the lead 
sometime are going to win. So do you want a man or not?
You can do this.
We know you’re strong enough to move the television set. 
But you should let him do it; say it’s too heavy for you—it’s a 
man’s job.
Yes, you’re right—there’s nothing wrong with your arm and 
you are perfectly capable of opening your own car door. But 
doggone it, when you’re going somewhere with a man, let him 
treat you like a lady and open the car door for you. If he doesn’t 
automatically open said car door, stand by the darn thing and 
don’t get in the vehicle until he realizes he needs to get his 
behind out of the driver’s seat and come around and open the 
car door for you. That’s his job.
We get that you’ve got plenty of money to pay for dinner. 
But sit there and let him pick up that check. That’s what he’s 
supposed to do when he’s out with a woman on a date.
Yes, you are independent and you don’t need anyone to take 
out the trash for you or hang your pictures or run to the Home 
Depot and pick up the supplies you need to ﬁx the sink. But I 
lie to you not: if you put your ﬁnger in your mouth and act like 
you haven’t a clue what to do or the strength to do it, your man 
will step right in and handle that for you—with a smile if you 
add a hearty, “Baby, thank you so much for doing this for me—I 
don’t know what I’d do without you.”
See, a lot of men would be better men if they were required 
to be, well, men. We’re in this new age, and women have taken 
on these roles out of necessity—I’ll admit that. But at some 
point, you’re either going to have to accept that you’re going to  
be the big ol’ strong, lonely woman, or you’re going to have to 
back down and just be a lady. Women play roles all the time—
why is it when it comes to this, you’re so unwilling to play the 
role, even when you know it’s going to give you what you want 
and need? In the long run, being a girl allows you to relax. 
Why not take the opportunity to relax? Honest to goodness, I 
promise you it’s not hard, it won’t kill you, and whatever it is 
that you need, he will hop to it if you just show him a little 
appreciation.
Take a page from my wife and I: there’s not a day that goes 
by that we don’t compliment each other at least several times a 
day, but on one speciﬁc day recently, when she left me in charge 
of the kids while she ran some errands and did some work 
around the house, she saw I was worn out from chasing behind 
the children. Chasing behind children is not something I do. I 
mean I can do it but it’s exhausting. Come on. Still, when Mar-
jorie walked into the room and saw the harried look on my 
face, she very sweetly ﬂipped the script on me and said, “Steve, 
thank you so much for watching the children—you’re a great 
father.” Boy, I can’t tell you how good that made me feel. She 
had hardly gotten the words out of her mouth before I hopped 
to, making sure those kids kept out of her way and stayed quiet 
while she was ﬁnishing up what she had to do. Had that com-
pliment not come through, I would have been salty about 
having to sit around with the kids all day when there were so 
many other things that I could have been doing—and wanted 
to do. That compliment, you see, made me remember why I 
was in the game, and especially why Marjorie is on the team.
Appreciating a man, not undermining his conﬁdence, is the 
best way to get the best out of your guy. And the best way to 
appreciate him is by being a girl, and especially letting him be 
a man.
Now, I’m convinced that being a girl is a lost art form—
something that every woman can use some lessons in. So I’ve 
taken the liberty of showing you how to be a girl in some of the 
basic but most important situations in which you’ll ﬁnd yourself 
with a man. Guaranteed, if he’s worth his salt, he’ll be all in.
Don’t tell him where you’d like to go— tell him 
the kind of food and atmosphere you enjoy, and 
then let him ﬁgure out a place that he thinks will 
suit your taste.
Don’t tell him you’ll drive— let him get you to 
where you all need to go.
Don’t tell him you want to go dutch— let him pay.
Don’t invite him up for a nightcap— kiss him 
good night and let him ﬁgure out what he needs 
to do to earn the cookie (but not before the 
ninety-day probation ends).
Don’t try to ﬁx the sink, the car, the toilet, or 
anything else— let him do it.
Don’t take out the garbage, paint, or mow the 
lawn— that’s his job.
Don’t do any of the heavy lifting— he was born 
with the muscle it takes to move sofas/television 
sets/bookshelves and the like.
Don’t be afraid to make a meal or two— the 
kitchen is both your and his friend.
Don’t wear a T-shirt to bed every night— a little 
lingerie never hurt anybody.

14
How to Get the Ring
 Your man knows what you want: the ultimate commit-
ment—The Ring.
He knows, too, what he needs: you.
It seems obvious, then, that he would get himself to the 
 jeweler, pick out a nice, hefty diamond, and then plot out an 
on-bended-knee proposal that would make the “will you marry 
me?” pitch that Grammy award–winning singer Seal made to 
supermodel Heidi Klum—he proposed in an igloo he had built 
on top of a glacier fourteen thousand feet above sea level—look 
like an invitation to the prom.
But your proposal never comes.
And the way your man is acting, it’s not coming anytime 
soon.
And so, you wait. And wait. And wait some more.
This is the story of all-too-many women—girlfriends who 
are putting in some serious work not only because they love 
their men, but because they want to prove they’re The One. 
Everybody is clear about how you prove to him you’re The 
One: Do all the things for him a wife would do—support him 
emotionally, be loyal, work it out in the bedroom, tell him you 
love him often and show it, too. Maybe live with him. Have his 
babies. Get close—really close—to his mom and sisters and 
friends. Basically, you give him everything he needs and all of 
what he wants.
Check out this “Strawberry Letter” from a listener who 
called herself “Biological Clock Ticker,” a thirty-one-year-old 
single, childless woman in a relationship she said feels like a 
“three-year-long booty call”:
He tells me he loves me and wants me to have his chil-
dren. My biological clock is ticking like crazy, and we 
have been trying for the past year to get pregnant, to 
no avail (I believe that this is a sign). The problem is 
that he says he does not want to be in a committed re-
l a t i o n s h i p  o r  m a r r i a g e  b e c a u s e  h e  d o e s n ’ t  w a n t  t o  
answer to anyone. As long as I have known him, I have 
shown him that I am not at all like the other women 
that he has dated. I was there for him when he injured 
himself, quit his job, when his father died, and when 
he was unemployed for months. I have been encourag-
ing him, and am there for him ﬁnancially and physi-
cally.  I’ve been waiting and hanging in there, hoping 
he’ll marry me because I don’t think that I will get 
anyone else that would want to have a child with me. 
Am I being a fool for waiting for him? Should I just let 
it go?
She and all too many women in similar predicaments can’t 
understand why, after all of this hard work, he won’t give her 
the one thing she needs and wants. Well, let me break it down 
for her and you. Your man hasn’t asked you to marry him be-
cause of one or more of the following reasons: (1) he is still 
married to someone else; (2) you’re really not the one he wants; 
or, the real answer you don’t want to hear, (3) you haven’t re-
quired him to marry you or set a date.
In fact, I know of a few guys whose ladies are smack-dab in 
the middle of this predicament right now. One that stands out 
is a  couple that dated for a year before she ended up pregnant. 
To her credit, the single mom (she has a son from an earlier 
failed relationship) knew she didn’t want to have a second ch ild 
with a man who wasn’t there to help raise her kids, so she made 
it simple for him: “I’m only going to have this child if you’re  
willing to be a father for real—not this part-time/every-once-
in-a-while/when-I-feel-like-it kind of dad.” And, faced with 
the prospect of losing her and his baby, he stepped up to the 
plate: He agreed to be there for their child, and gave up his 
apartment, and moved in with his girlfriend while they pre-
pared for the birth of their son.
Oh, she thought the proposal, the ring, and the wedding would 
follow shortly after the baby was born. To his credit, her boy-
friend did come through with a ring. But she’s been wearing it 
for seven years now, and though she’s been hoping, waiting, and 
praying for a wedding date, they’re no closer to walking down 
the aisle today than they were the day their child was born. 
They share a home. They share parenting responsibilities. They 
share bills, schedules, car notes, church pews, and most cer-
tainly a bed. But they don’t share the last name or a marriage 
certiﬁcate.
She can’t understand why they’re playing house  instead of 
making an ofﬁcial home  together. He feels as if they’ve got a 
home, and really, there’s not much more need to go any further 
than they already have.
And this is the dilemma.
See, to some men, marriage ﬁts into the same category as 
eating vegetables: you know it’s something you should be doing, 
but you don’t really want to because, well, the greasy, fat-ﬁlled, 
salty, juicy burger and fries is just so much more satisfying. I’ve 
told you time and again in this book that we men are very 
simple creatures, and if it were not for women, we’d be living 
rather, well, simply—the money would go to mostly shiny 
things, our time would be spent watching sports and strippers, 
and there would be no need for most of us to keep a clean house 
or dress nice or do anything other than play video games. We’re 
happy living this way—it makes us feel young and carefree. 
Marriage does not. Responsibility and marriage do not ﬁt into 
that feeling, until all of the playing gets tired and we realize we 
have to be grown-ups, or something—or someone—makes us 
grow up.
But here’s what you need to know: men are pretty clear that 
marriage is what women want—that despite your indepen-
dence, despite the statistics that say half the marriages in Amer-
ica end in divorce, despite the amount of time, work, sweat, and 
tears you know you’ll have to pour into building an imperfect 
relationship, in the end, you women still believe in the fairy tale 
of the husband and the house and the white picket fence and the 
2.5 kids.
Men are also clear that they can slowly give out the things 
that make it seem like they’re making the march to the altar—
just to keep you hanging in there. Trust me when I say this: 
men do everything with a purpose, and in the case where a 
man dates you for an extended length of time, or moves in with 
you, or gives you a ring, but still refuses to be pinned down on 
setting a wedding date? He’s doing it to lock you down. He 
wants you, and he doesn’t want anyone else to have you.
And I’m here to tell you, the only reason a man gets away 
with a lengthy engagement or holds off the proposal altogether 
is because his woman hasn’t required  him to set the date; she is 
stupidly sitting there allowing her boyfriend to dictate to her 
when he’s ready, though she slept with this man, cut off any 
other prospective husbands, and, in some cases, moved in with 
him and even had his children.
I simply can’t be diplomatic here.
It’s just plain dumb.
Get into your man’s mind-set here: if a man is willing to be 
your boyfriend at length, live with you, be an involved father, 
or give you a ring, he has already taken himself off the player’s 
list—technically, he’s scratched his name off the sport ﬁshing 
registry. He can’t bring babes to the house. He can’t talk on the 
phone or take any phone calls from babes at the house. He can’t 
leave to go see a babe when he wants to—or stay with her all 
night. He knows he can’t give his money to any other woman 
because he’s pooling it with you. Why does a man in a commit-
ted relationship with you accept the above list of “he can’ts”?
Because he wants you and he doesn’t want to lose you.
So now there’s only one more step to get the marriage equa-
tion: the setting of the wedding date. You know you want it, so 
here’s what you do: get some requirements and standards and 
enforce them—tell him, “I love you, you love me, we’re in a 
terriﬁc relationship—one that I’ve always dreamed about. And 
what I want now is to be married to you. So I need you to set a 
date, and get back to me in a  couple of weeks. If I don’t get 
asked by then, then please know I’m not sitting around waiting 
for you to dictate when my happiness button gets pushed. The 
arrangements we have now are not making me happy.”
What? This is a perfectly reasonable request. Otherwise, 
how long are you going to stay in the arrangement where you’re 
not getting what you want—four years? Ten years? Forever?
T h e  t i m e l i n e  i s  y o u r s ;  s t o p  gi v i n g  u p  y o u r  p o w e r .  T h e  
moment we see you’re willing to put aside your hopes of walk-
ing down the aisle, we’re going to shelve it, too. And we’re 
going to go on ahead and keep on renting you out, with the  
option to buy if you let us. Don’t be the Baltic Avenue on the 
Monopoly board game—the one that anyone can just roll 
the dice, land on, and pay a  couple of dollars to chill on with-
out any obligations or worries. You’ve got to go to Broadway 
on the game board; make your man round the corner and land 
on that high end property—recognize that you’re prime real 
estate that’s for purchase only.
Note: This is not about asking your man to marry you. It’s 
about taking yourself out of that 1945 mentality, where you 
stand around waiting for some guy to beg you for your hand in 
marriage. You’ve had it drummed into your head so cold—that 
“I’ll never ask a man to marry me” thing—that you’ve lost all 
sensibility when it comes to getting what you want. But it’s not 
1945 anymore! Back in the day when my parents and their 
generation were courting and getting married, women could 
afford to wait around for the man to get it together because 
really, the options for men were limited. If a guy lived in a 
farmhouse, the next farmhouse was two miles away, and that 
one might not have a girl in it—just two more boys—so he’d 
have to walk another two miles to actually see a potential 
mate, much less ﬁnd the one. And when they courted, they 
courted ; he had to walk over there, write little messages on 
rocks on the way over so everybody knew his intentions, leave 
a note by the tree and send up smoke signals so the girl knew 
what was up. Oh, the courtship was far more romantic, be-
cause the men knew they had to behave properly—not just for 
their intendeds, but their intendeds’ daddies. The boys had to 
go over to the house, ask permission to sit in the room to-
gether, and the adults were present because there weren’t any 
extra rooms for them to sit in alone. And that courting culmi-
nated in the men pulling the fathers aside and, with their 
shoulders squared and chins up, asking the fathers for their 
daughters’ hands in marriage. And whatever the father said is 
what went.
Now women have been taught all their lives that if a man 
loves you, he will court you and ask for your hand in marriage. 
The problem with this is that you’ve been trained to use 
twentieth- century logic in twenty-ﬁrst-century situations. 
There’s no slim pickings of women out here—women are at 
every turn, working with men, living in apartment buildings 
with them, riding the bus and trains with them, hanging out at 
the clubs with them. Technology’s such that you can contact a 
woman without ever even seeing her. It’s not 1945 anymore—
you can’t hang on to those old ways. This, “If he wants to 
marry me, he’ll ask me” thing has got to stop. Because we’re 
not going to ask you when you’re ready—we’re going to play 
with you until you give us your requirements and standards, 
and stand by them. I’m not telling you to get on bended knee. 
I’m telling you to set a timeline for the ring and the date, and 
tell the man you want to be married to what it is.
I recognize that this is hard. But let me tell you what’s really 
hard: dating/living with/having a baby with a man who has no 
intention of marrying you and eight years up the road, he walks 
out and you’re left to ﬁnd a new man/pay all the bills after years 
of splitting them with someone else/raising those kids on your 
own. Oh, it can be done. But recognize just how hard that will 
be. All I’m suggesting is that you get the little uncomfortable 
moments out of the way early—let him know now what you 
want and expect. Make clear to him what you’re worth, and 
that you come at a cost; tell him how much you’re worth like 
you’re about to list yourself on eBay for a million dollars. Break 
down your value: say, “I respect you, I adore you, I’m affection-
ate, I pay attention to you, I’m punctual, I’m kind, I’m loyal, I’ll 
hav e y our children and lo v e them madly—and all of this is 
available for a handsome sum. I need your time, loyalty, support, 
affection, attention, punctuality, kindness, gentleman ways—I 
need the doors opened, chairs pulled out, your respect, and 
above all else, your love. I also expect a diamond ring and a 
walk down the aisle.”
Now when a man hears this, he’s going to pay attention, 
because you’ve placed a high value on yourself. He’ll see that 
and question the situation: “Is she worth all of that?” If your 
cost is too high, he will move on. But you don’t want that guy 
anyway, right? He’s just looking to rent you.  People who rent 
don’t care anything about the property they’re with—they let it 
get run down, beat up, don’t care what it looks like. They use 
the space, and when they ﬁnd something better, they decline 
the new lease and they move on out and on to the next rental.
You want the guy who is ready to make the Broadway pur-
chase—the one who’s looking to move in, stay awhile, take care 
of the lawn, make sure the plumbing is right, paint the walls, 
add furniture, pay the mortgage faithfully. You know, make 
your house a home. That guy right there? He’s the one who will 
take responsibility and pop the question, like you need him to.
After all, boys shack. Men build homes.
Demand that he be a man about it. If he’s not in love with 
you, he’s not going to go for any of this, so now you know. But 
if he loves you, he will profess it, he will provide for you, and 
he will protect you. If he really loves you, the ultimate profes-
sion is, “This is my wife.” You can start with, “This is my girl,” 
or “This is my baby’s mother,” or even, “This is my ﬁancée.” 
But after a  couple of years, you need to move beyond this ﬁan-
cée title. At the very least, you deserve clarity. Because women 
do not do well without clarity. The thing you all want to know 
is: Where’s this relationship going? Do you love me? Am I the 
one? What do you see for us?
That’s it in a nutshell—every man knows this is coming up 
the road for him. He may not be ready for it now, but if he’s not 
ready for it now and you are, then you don’t have a good match, 
do you? So why waste all of your valuable years on something 
that’s not going where you want it to go? Instead, you should 
seek out someone else who wants to go where you’re going. I 
truly believe that’s why there are so many women in their 
midthirties unmarried—because somewhere along the line, 
they just didn’t put their foot down and move on. But I can tell 
you from personal experience: put your foot down, set some 
standards, and watch how fast he falls in line. The reason I’m 
married to Marjorie today is because she had a timeline, some 
requirements, and some standards. I saw them early in our rela-
tionship; I saw them on the night our relationship was about to 
end; I saw them when I got her back. I’ll tell you this much, if 
I still had the factory job at Ford and she needed $400 of my 
$600 paycheck, I would have given it to her.
I want to protect her.
And she makes me proud to be her man.
You can have this, too. Don’t be another heartbreak story. 
Start putting yourself ﬁrst—get where you want to be, and 
make your man be all that he can be. Remember this: the 
number one cause of failure in this country is the fear of failure. 
Fear paralyzes you from taking action. Don’t be afraid to lose 
him, because if a man truly loves you, he’s not going 
anywhere.

15
Quick Answers to the 
Questions You’ve Always 
Wanted to Ask
 If I’ve told you once, I’ve told you a million times: men are 
really simple creatures. And there are some subjects we’re 
just not going to spend a whole lot of time thinking about—
we’re just going to answer your questions, straight, no chaser. 
So I asked a bunch of my female co-workers and associates to 
ﬁre some questions at me—things they’ve always wanted to 
know that their girlfriends just couldn’t answer for them in a 
satisfying way. They asked—I answered. Here it goes:
 Men have different aesthetics, so what might be 
a turnoff for one man may be a total turn-on for 
another. Rest assured, though, that no matter the ﬂaws 
you ﬁnd when you look at yourself in the mirror, 
somewhere on God’s earth, you are really “doing it” 
for someone—someone out there is attracted to you 
exactly the way you are. A conﬁdent woman is incred-
ibly attractive, no matter what mold she ﬁts in. Men 
are also very visual  people, so there is no question men 
will check out a woman’s clothes, the way she walks, 
her makeup, her feet, her hands, her daintiness—little 
escapes our notice.
 For the average man, whatever you’re doing to 
make yourself look beautiful while you’re hanging on 
his arm is cool by him. Boob jobs, tummy tucks, breast 
reductions, nose jobs—if it makes you feel beautiful, 
we’re good. But if you’re telling your man you want a 
nose job and he sees nothing wrong with the nose you 
already have, then maybe you ought to think about 
leaving your nose alone. Why run the risk of some-
thing going wrong when your man is already happy 
with the way you look? Why lose the extra weight if 
your man is happy with you the way you are? Sure, it’s 
ﬁne for you to do it if it’s something you want to do for 
yourself. But a man isn’t going to care about it one way 
or the other if he’s already happy with what you have. 
 A lot of men in their forties and ﬁfties start trying to 
validate themselves by going out with women who are 
signiﬁcantly younger. It’s the equivalent of those same-
age men going out and buying itty-bitty sports cars with 
big engines that make a lot of noise; they do this because 
their “engine” doesn’t make a lot of noise anymore. This 
is especially true if that man doesn ’ t have his life to-
gether. This isn’t a reﬂection on women at all; it’s his 
problem. But guess what? There’s a younger man look-
ing at you right now, saying to himself, “Wow—I sure 
wouldn’t mind validating myself with her!” There’s a lot 
of that going on, too, you know. Like I said before, 
there’s somebody for everybody.
 Men like all kinds of women. There’s a man out 
there for every body type. There are men who like 
them big, there are men who like only small, petite 
women, and there are men who prefer women who ﬁt 
between those sizes. It runs the gamut. It does not 
matter what size you are—there is a man somewhere 
for you.
 I wouldn’t, and most nonsmokers wouldn’t, ei-
ther. The skin of women who smoke ages prema-
turely and their lips are stained. It ages them internally, 
too. And for me, it exhibits a weakness and a lack of 
understanding about their own health. Once we non-
smoking men see that a woman doesn’t care about 
her own health, we immediately equate that to her 
inability to care for her man and her kids. Most non-
smoking men will not tolerate a smoking woman—
not on a permanent basis. We’ll sleep with you, but 
we’re not taking you home.
 A man who loves you is going to love you regard-
less. As we ourselves get bellies and love handles, we 
certainly understand yours. We get that you’re not go-
ing to look exactly like you did when we ﬁrst met you. 
If you can keep it in some kind of parameter, though—
gain ten pounds, but avoid gaining a hundred—and be 
sexy and ﬁx it up and look nice with whatever extra 
weight you’ve put on or taken off, we’re cool. If your 
man is shallow, he’ll insist he just can’t see past it. But 
if a man recognizes that, a few pounds notwithstand-
ing, you’re still making an effort to do what it takes to 
be visually appealing, he will be ﬁne with it.
 Heels, baby. Heels. If we could get athletic shoes with 
heels for women, we would. It’s just a really sexy thing to 
us. I don’t know a single man who prefers women in ﬂats; 
I’ve never run into one. We all think heels make your 
legs more beautiful, they make your walk more femi-
nine—and you, too. And that’s what we're attracted to.
 A smart man can’t date a dumb woman. But he can 
use a dumb woman. Most smart men don’t want to 
date a dumb woman because we need to know that she 
can handle herself and our affairs, especially if we’re 
thinking about giving her a ring. She can’t walk into 
the ofﬁce party acting like the ofﬁce dummy. Now, 
we don’t mind having a woman on the side who is 
dumb and ﬁne, but we won’t keep her.
 It’s a total come-on. In our mind, if you want to 
buy us a drink, you want us. And if we think you want 
us, well, then, game on—we’re coming in for the kill.
 Some men like it, but a man who doesn’t drink 
certainly isn’t going to care for a woman who par-
takes in the spirits. Know, though, that no man likes 
a drunk woman, unless you’re in college and we’re 
heading back to your dorm room. Remember, men 
want women to act like ladies at all times. If you 
drink socially, cool. But if your man has to carry you 
out, because you’ve passed out, you’re hanging on to 
someone else, or you’re talking loud and telling him 
y o u lik e slamming do wn sh o ts, i t’ s go ing to be a  
problem.
 O n l y  i f  y o u ’ r e  i n  a  c o m m i t t e d  r e l a t i o n s h i p .  
Other than that, all he’ll think is (a) you’re trying to 
trap him, and (b) you expect something in return. 
Just wait and see what he’s going to bring to your 
table ﬁrst—let him be the man and spoil you. Real 
men like to do this for the women they care about. 
Note: Be thankful for the gifts he gives you, but 
don’t take it as the end all/be all sign that you’re go-
ing to get a ring next week. A gift is just that—a 
gift. Not a sign of things to come. Only his ac-
tions—the way he professes, protects, and provides 
for you—will give you a true sign of how this man 
feels about you.
 Don’t do it in the beginning of the relationship, 
unless you’re perfectly comfortable with the title gold 
digger. But if you’re in a relationship—just you and 
him—and you’re really in a ﬁnancial pinch, mention it 
and see how he reacts. Say, “I’m really in a crunch, and 
I’m embarrassed to ask, but I really need your help. Do 
you think you could loan me $100 to meet this pay-
ment? I’ll pay you back as soon as I can.” Most men 
who really care about you won’t think anything of it if 
they have it.
 Without a doubt. If you’re dealing with a man 
whose life isn’t on track, who isn't at peace with who he 
is, how much he makes, and what he does, you might 
have a guy who’d be reluctant to help because he’s still 
struggling to reach his goals and won’t have time to help 
you with yours. But if he has his act together and he’s 
really secure in his manhood, he’ll help.
 Not at all. These days it’s almost a necessity for 
both the husband and the wife to work to make ends 
meet. But if a man is in a position to provide every-
thing his family needs, most men would not have a 
problem with his woman staying home.
 This is the twenty-ﬁrst century, so most men don’t 
have a problem with women drivers. But there are still 
some old-fashioned, chauvinist men who think women 
should leave the driving to the opposite sex. I don’t 
know what cave they’re living in. Matter of fact, I 
haven’t met any of them yet.
 No. Some guys like that, but mostly what they like 
is enjoying the game in peace. If you’re not into it, go 
ﬁnd something else to do.
 We’ll go if you make us and it’s the only way we 
can spend time with you. But it’s not what we want 
to do. Think about it: the Men’s Department is al-
most always on the ﬁrst ﬂoor, by the door, and al-
ways one of the smaller sections in the store. There 
is no juniors department, no couture department, 
none of that. It’s so we can get in and get out. You 
never walk in and see men rummaging through the 
sales racks and holding shirts up to their chests and 
openly asking if they’d look better in the blue or the 
green. We go in knowing exactly what we want, 
and come out with it. Rarely anything more. In and 
out: that’s what we like about shopping. Getting in, 
and getting out.
 It depends on the man. But really, who cares 
these days? It’s not the big stink that it used to be. 
Personally I don’t care. Love comes in every color—
and if a person ﬁnds love and that person is of a dif-
ferent race from him or her, it shouldn’t matter 
because the two of them found love. And isn’t that 
what counts the most? Women have to make sure, 
though, that that’s what they’re doing it for. If she’s 
doing it for some kind of status, then that’s a horrible 
reason to get married to someone from a different 
race. But if she’s doing it for love, more power to 
her.
 Because we’re hot. We’re exhausted. We put in a lot 
of work, we’re sweaty and burning up and we just need 
you to hold on a minute before you come climbing over 
to the side of our bed talking about holding something.
 It’s not a good idea to break that news at the kitchen 
table or on a long car ride. Nothing good can come 
from that. When you question our sexual abilities, we 
get really nervous and really self-conscious really 
quickly. I suggest you break the news while you’re in 
the act. We’re a little bit more open to it then. Say 
something like, “Oh, I like it when you do this,” or 
“That’s nice, baby, now do it this way,” and watch 
him go to work. We’ll put our backs into it then, 
because it makes us feel like we’re pleasing you in-
stead of absorbing complaints. During the act, we’re 
open to any and all suggestions, as long as we think 
we’re getting it.
 Whatever you do, don’t open this conversation 
with the dreaded four words: “We need to talk.” Our 
defenses immediately go up, warning signs start ﬂash-
ing before our eyes, and now we’re pretty conﬁdent 
whatever good time we had planned is about to be 
ruined. Instead, try telling your man spontaneously 
something like, “I just can’t get enough of you.” That 
will make him know that the bar is up there—he’ll be 
more than willing to jump over it because you’ve made 
him feel like you want him, instead of like there’s 
something wrong.
 One day is more than enough punishment for us if 
we’re talking about some kind of argument. You’re 
mad about something he said about the kids and you 
don’t want to have sex tonight? Okay. But tomorrow, 
if you’re still mad about the kids and he’s tapping you 
on the shoulder and you’re shaking off his hand, that’s 
a problem. Men are not going to hang in for that too 
long. But we’ll go without longer if we violated your 
trust in some kind of way and we need to gain back 
your respect and trust. We understand that much.
 I haven’t a clue—only gay men, or women who’ve 
dated men on the down low, can answer that question 
for you. I don’t fall into either of those categories.
 If a man goes along with an “open relationship” or 
he offers it, he’s doing so because you are not in his long-
term plans. He does not see a future with you. Both of 
you can stop all this “We wanted some spice in the rela-
tionship” talk. When a man loves you, he’s not trying to 
share you with anybody—period. When you ﬁnd that 
guy who’s willing, I will show you the guy who’s not in 
love with you. We’re just not cut out that way.
 Yes—it makes us uncomfortable. We think 
you’ re trying to dig deep into our soul when you 
start trolling through our past and, possibly, passing 
judgment on it. Still, you have the right to know 
about a man’s past. Just don’t ask about it on the ﬁrst 
date, because you will not get an honest answer, 
ever. He hasn’t even decided about how permanent 
this thing between you is going to be—there’ll be 
no need to reveal the soul. Don’t even waste your 
time asking about his previous woman; all he’s go-
ing to claim is hurt, not what he may have done to 
her. Give your relationship time, and he’ll reveal 
what you need to know.
 Most men have a problem with that. Think about 
the three ways I told you a man shows his love. He pro-
tects, provides, and professes. And if we can’t say “This 
is Mrs. Harvey,” then you’re taking away the very core 
of how we show our love. We also need to know that 
we have your loyalty, and you show that by taking our 
name. We really don’t care how important your dad’s 
name or your family name is to you; we’re about to start 
a family. A man needs to know you’re as committed to 
this family as you are to your old one. You can hyphen-
ate it if you want to, but that last name really needs to be 
the same as your man’s. And if you’re not committed to 
that, then why don’t you just go marry your daddy?
 There’s no need to do that; we’ve got that covered. 
We’re pretty clear that our woman can walk out at any 
time. But if you push it and try to make us jealous, you’re 
going to be playing a dangerous game. Doing that almost 
always triggers a reﬂex in a man; he might be liable to say, 
“Oh, okay—two can play at that game!” If you feel like 
you have to make him jealous because you’re not getting 
the attention you want, you might want to consult the 
“Men Need Standards—Get Some” chapter, and then use 
some of those tips to get the man you need and deserve.
 I strongly suggest that if you’re in a fully committed 
relationship, all the chitchat you’re having with a male 
friend gets dialed back. Take down the college pictures 
of the two of you, don’t let him call the house or send 
gifts and such; continuing this every day is just asking for 
trouble. Think about it: I don’t care if you could only see 
her picture in the dark with an invisible blue light; if 
your man kept a picture of another woman in his per-
sonal belongings, you’d lose your mind. How would you 
like it if he had a woman calling the house asking to 
speak to him? Or he accepted ﬂowers from her? Exactly. 
What I suggest is that you avoid doing anything that will 
make your man have uncomfortable thoughts about you 
and someone else—period. Form a two-handed circle 
and don’t let anyone else in, especially male “friends.” 
You’ll be happy you did.
 Mostly out of weakness and a need to control 
something in their lives. But I have found that men 
who hit women have no tales or stories of hitting men. 
They’re that weak.
 We don’t mind them. I mean, your man can’t tell 
you not to have girlfriends any more than you can say 
he can’t go play golf with the boys. Girlfriends are ﬁne.
 We hate gossiping. But we know we can’t stop it. 
It’s an invasion of privacy, and a man is pretty conﬁ-
dent that if you and your friends are willing to talk 
about other  people together, then your friends are 
probably talking about you and him, too. Keep that in 
mind the next time you start getting all into other 
 people’s business.
 Not if she’s The One. Wives and signiﬁcant oth-
ers are off-limits in conversations between men, be-
cause no man wants you thinking about his woman 
any kind of way, much less in a romantic or sexual 
way. Every man is clear on this. However, if you’re 
not The One—you’re just someone that we’re “do-
ing” while we look for The One—then you will be 
talked about, rest assured.
 Look, if you don’t have a good relationship with 
his mother, and she doesn’t care for you, it is going to 
be stressful. Any woman who has been in a relation-
ship with a man for ninety days should have met the 
family already, and if he hasn’t introduced you, then 
you either need to ask why, or you should pretty much 
accept that he’s not interested in forging a long-term 
relationship with you. If you’re good enough for him 
to make it to his bed, you should be good enough to 
meet his mother.
 Hell, no. No man is breaking up with his girl be-
cause she doesn’t get along with family members (other 
than his mother). A sister doesn’t have to come around 
to the house and be a part of family functions if she 
can’t get along with the woman a man loves. The same 
holds true for cousins, aunties, and uncles.
 If you put your family before him, he’s out of there.
 It’s cool—men know the child has a father, and if 
he’s in his kid’s life, we understand we’ll have to 
have some type of interaction with him. But your 
new man needs to be able to come to your house and 
be himself. If he’s in a committed relationship with 
you and he sees the kids doing something wrong and 
he can’t say anything to them about it, then you’re 
not letting him be the provider and protector he 
wants to be, and that’s going to be a problem for 
him. You can’t allow a man to buy school clothes, 
help put a roof over your head, put groceries in the 
refrigerator and buy gas for the car, and then tell him 
he doesn’t have the right to be a father ﬁgure—if not 
a father—to the kids. If that’s the case, then what is 
his point of being there? You’ll have to ﬁgure out 
some kind of balance—one that allows your child’s 
father to do his job, but also allows your new man to 
do his job, too. And if he can’t participate in raising 
the child, that could explain why the baby’s daddy 
left in the ﬁrst place.
 Look, there are only a few Will and Jada Pinkett 
Smiths in this world. If you’re one of them, congratu-
lations. But really, he’s not betting that you two will 
hit it off too well, and so he won’t force the issue.
 If you’re calling to say, “I have a special surprise for 
you when you get home,” that’s a good interruption. 
But if it’s a phone call to talk about petty problems? 
Not a good interruption. Just because you feel like say-
ing something right now this minute doesn’t mean it 
should be said.
 Once a man gives his answer to whatever ques-
tion you’re asking (or he thinks he heard, even if you 
never asked one), he’s probably not listening to you 
anymore. Your cue is when he gives an answer. As far 
as he’s concerned, his solution will ﬁx whatever it is 
you’re talking about, and if you’re still talking after 
that, he’s not listening anymore.
 That “I don’t cook thing” is really big, now. If 
you’re gorgeous and you don’t cook, we can kind of 
overlook it. But if we’re married and you’re not hook-
ing yourself up like you used to and you don’t cook? 
You’re asking too much—you’re taking us for granted. 
Men appreciate a woman who can put together a meal. 
Here’s good news for you women who can’t cook: all 
of the cooking issues you have in the kitchen can be 
balanced out if you can really cook in the bedroom.
 Absolutely. When we’re considering whether to 
get into a committed relationship with you, we’re 
thinking about what our house will be like, whether 
you’ll be a good mother, if you’ll be able to handle the 
ﬁnances and make sound decisions. You should be 
evaluating us in the same fashion.
 Men cannot stand women who are not clean. 
When our boys come over, do you really think we 
want to show them a junky house? Are we really 
going to invite our mothers over to sit on a couch 
in a nasty living room? I don’t think so. How the 
house looks is a reﬂection of you;  people aren’t go-
ing to walk in and say, “He sure keeps a dirty 
house”; they’re going to say, “She sure keeps a dirty 
house.” No matter how society changes or how 
many responsibilities men take on in the household, 
the bottom line is that everyone still expects the 
woman to turn a house into a home—a clean home. 
We men are no different. We like it when you put 
out the candles and the ﬂoral arrangements and the 
china and the silver, and we like to walk into a 
clean house. Now if we’re both working and you 
don’t have time to keep it up, and I don’t want to 
keep it up, then we need to carve out some cash to 
get a housekeeper! But the house simply cannot be 
dirty.
 Yes. It determines how much we’re going to have to 
work, and how much ﬁxing we’re going to have to do 
to provide for you. Now, it may not be a deal breaker. 
But it could certainly be a factor that men weigh.
 We’ll follow you to a new job if we’re secure in 
our manhood and conﬁdent we can still provide for 
you the way we want and need to. But if we have to 
lose everything we’ve worked to build to do it, and 
there’s not evidence that we’ll be able to pick up the 
pieces while you’re working your new job, then it’s 
going to be a tough ﬁght.
 We’re only interested in it if it’s going to save our 
ass. If we think we’re going to lose you and counseling 
will keep us together, then we’ll go. But if it won’t 
save our ass, we can’t see any good reason why we 
should sit on a couch and talk to a person with a tablet, 
getting judged for every move we’ve ever made.
 We like them. But please don’t expect the same 
reaction you would have. We’re not going to go to 
pieces and cry because you brought home a gift or 
planned a special trip or put together a nice, romantic 
surprise dinner for us. That’s, well, not very manly.
 For the most part, we don’t worry about it to the 
extent that women do, because we know your makeup 
is different from ours. You’re more careful about the 
mates you choose, and you have higher standards when 
it comes to deciding who you will sleep with. In our 
minds, this drastically cuts down the likelihood of our 
women cheating.

 I would like to acknowledge the fabulous listeners of the 
Steve Harvey Morning Show  who have inspired me with 
their questions concerning relationships. 
I would like to thank Denene Millner, who had the daunt-
ing task of taking my words and my sometimes unique phrases, 
putting them on paper, and making them readable by people in 
the human race. In other words I used her as a translator and 
she has managed in a wonderful way to make my thoughts 
quite enjoyable and insightful to read. 
To Shirley Strawberry, my cohost of the morning show, and 
to Elvira Guzman, my publicist: The two of them sat through 
every single writing session and every single editing session 
and bombarded me with questions, scenarios, and things from 
the female’s perspective that we as men could never possibly ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
know. These two very different viewpoints, one from a single 
female with no kids and the other from a woman who has a 
child and has been divorced, allowed me to get a wide spectrum 
of questions, and without them this book would not have been 
as thorough. 
To my wife, Marjorie, who has made my life so full, so 
complete, and, most important, so peacefully happy that it has 
allowed me to sit down and think beyond my current circum-
stance. Her cheerful spirit has made me a more cheerful person 
and that has allowed me to be far more sharing than I’ve ever 
been.
And to my heavenly Father who has created every blessing 
I have ever known in my lifetime, I give him all the glory the 
honor and the praise.
 began doing stand-up comedy 
in the mid-1980s. His success as a stand-up comedian led 
to a WB network show, The Steve Harvey Show,  which ran 
from 1996 to 2002. It was a huge hit and won multiple 
NAACP Image Awards. In 1997, Harvey continued his 
work in stand-up comedy, touring as one of the “Kings 
of Comedy,” along with Cedric the Entertainer, D. L. 
Hughley, and Bernie Mac. The comedy team would later 
be reunited in a ﬁlm by Spike Lee called The Original 
Kings of Comedy . Steve Harvey is now widely known 
as the host of the nationally syndicated Steve Harvey 
Morning Show,  which has more than seven million 
listeners . Harvey continues his unending pursuit and 
commitment to furthering opportunities in high schools 
throughout the country with generous contributions 
from the Steve Harvey Foundation.STEVE HARVEY
WWW.STEVEHARVEY.COMAbout the Author
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information 
on your favorite HarperCollins author. 
Credits
Designed by Janet M. Evans 
Photography by Quantrell Colbert 
Copyright
ACT LIKE A LADY , THINK LIKE A MAN . Copyright © 2009 by Steve 
Harvey. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American 
Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have 
been granted the non-exclusive, nontransferable right to access and 
read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be 
reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse 
engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage 
and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic 
or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the 
express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.  
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader December 2008 
ISBN 978-0-06-179655-5 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Australia 
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia 
Canada 
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 
New Zealand 
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited 
Auckland, New Zealand 
United Kingdom 
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 
77-85 Fulham Palace Road 
London, W6 8JB, UK 
United States 
HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 
10 East 53rd Street About the Publisher 
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au 
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900 
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca 
P .O. Box 1 
New York, NY 10022 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com http://www.harpercollins.co.nz 
http://ww w.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk

