What It Is—And How to Break Free
Timothy R. Jennings, M.D.Codependency
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   1Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   1 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
Codependency: What It Is—And How to Break Free
By Timothy R. Jennings, M.D.
Copyright © 2024 by Come and Reason Ministries.  
All rights reserved.
4922 La Collina Way, Suite 100
Ooltewah, TN 37363
comeandreason.com
requests@comeandreason.com
423-661-4734
Printed in the USA.
Unless ottherwise noted, Scriptures are taken from the Holy Bible,  
NEW INTERNATIONAL VERSION®, NIV® Copyright © 1984 by 
Biblica, Inc.® Used by permission. All rights reserved worldwide.
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   2Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   2 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
Codependency, or dependency, is an unhealthy relationship 
structure in which strong feelings of attraction are mistaken for true love. 
The underlying motivating energy that drives and sustains dependency 
relationships is the exact opposite of love; it is fear—fear of rejection, 
fear of abandonment, fear of inadequacy, fear of not being loved, fear of 
being alone, fear of being bad, fear of punishment, fear of condemnation, 
and the myriad other forms that fear takes. Such fear causes internal 
insecurity, a feeling of terror, dread, and doubt, which is often 
accompanied by guilt and shame. 
For the dependent person, the internal sense of self is typically 
formed from imagined or perceived flaws. Any actual shortcomings are 
markedly inflated and distorted by the fear into crushing doubts and a 
warped sense of individuality—one marked by the foreboding feeling of 
certain rejection if others ever saw them in the same way they feel about 
themselves. “If people knew me, they would hate me; I don’t deserve to 
be loved; I am not as good as others,” etc. 
The fear and distorted sense of self cause feelings of desperation, 
a crushing sense of failure, which demands that action be taken to 
relieve the emotional burden. The internal self-condemnation and sense 
of inadequacy can be momentarily relieved when one experiences 
acceptance, validation, or approval from another. The experience of 
perceiving oneself to be loved, valued, and appreciated provides an 
emotional counterbalance to the sinking feelings of inadequacy. 
However, for the dependent person, this external validation 
becomes an internal emotional counterweight upon which they 
depend for their internal sense of wholeness and peace. That is, they What It Is—And How to Break FreeCodependency
3
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   3Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   3 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
need  someone else to make them feel whole, complete, worthwhile, 
acceptable, and secure in themselves as a person.
Trapped in the Cycle
Even though other people’s approval makes them feel better 
about themselves (in that moment), because no objective change has 
happened in the heart, mind, or attitude of the dependent person about 
themselves, they don’t actually believe  they are worthy of the affection 
they are receiving. They fear it is only a matter of time before they will be 
“found out,” rejected, and lose the affirmation they so desire. Thus, they 
live, instead of in other-centered love, in fear of losing that which they 
desperately need. 
Such a state of mind leads to interpreting innocent events as 
threats—a spouse comes home late and suspicion arises that they 
were with another, more lovable person; a comment is made about not 
enjoying a certain dish, which is interpreted as “I can’t do anything right.” 
This leads to external monitoring, attempts to control, accusations, and 
criticisms, all based on fear of loss rather than on love for the other. 
Further, the person with 
this internal sense of inadequacy 
doesn’t believe that truly mature, 
healthy people will find them 
attractive, so being around such 
people increases their sense of 
anxiety and fear of rejection; 
thus, they gravitate toward and 
prefer people struggling with 
similar emotional problems, 
which causes the codependent 
parties to inflame the fears and 
wounds in one another rather 
than help each other heal. 
If you had been living in the woods for weeks and were unwashed, 
unshaven, and wearing dirty clothes, with whom would you feel more 
comfortable associating with: a typical church crowd, doctors at a 
renowned medical convention, patrons at a nice restaurant, or homeless 
drug addicts living in a tent city? In a similar manner, those who have 
4
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   4Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   4 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
formed a sense of self that is viewed as less than others will actively avoid 
emotionally healthy people and, instead, seek to form relationships with 
people struggling with similar problems, which leads to the very common 
codependent relationship.
Repeated Self-Destruction
Let me be clear: People struggling with dependency or who are 
in codependent relationships are not “evil” people; they are not “bad” 
people. They are hurting, wounded, 
struggling people, and in my 
experience, they often are some 
of the best people in heart, people 
who desperately long to be good, 
healthy, happy, and free—people 
who want to be successful and to 
be bastions of strength for their 
families and communities but who 
struggle to achieve that outcome 
simply because of unhealed 
emotional wounds. 
The codependent relationship 
is a result of the emotional 
woundedness impacting and 
directing their choices in how they 
connect and relate to people. The 
decisions of a dependent person are primarily made out of fear rather 
than other-centered love; thus, decisions are made in regard to what 
they think the other person will think of them, how the other person will 
respond, how the other person will feel, rather than what is objectively 
right, healthy, and reasonable in their governance of self. 
This kind of decision-making moves the motive for making choices 
away from one’s own judgment, from what one determines would 
actually be best in any given situation, to their perception of what another 
person would be most pleased with or least disappointed with, regardless 
of what is actually healthiest. 
For instance, a codependent person might determine that it is 
healthy and reasonable to say yes to an invitation to attend a Bible study 
5
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   5Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   5 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
one evening after work. But rather than saying yes, they say no because 
of the fear that their significant other will be mad at them if they do. The 
fear of the other person’s response overrules their own judgment—and 
the emotional need not to be rejected or devalued by their partner, and 
the need to keep the partner happy, is more important to them than 
doing what their own judgment determines is best. This is ultimately 
driven by fear, the fear of losing the support, affection, and affirmation 
of the one they emotionally depend upon.
Unfortunately, this type of decision-making worsens the individual 
who makes such decisions. Why? When we make a choice to go against 
our own good judgment for ourselves, our judgment makes a new 
judgment that says about oneself, “You’re weak! You’re a coward! You’re 
spineless! You make me sick!” And, as a result, our self-esteem falls 
further, making us feel even more certain that we are less than others—
thus, we need greater external approval to offset our increasing internal 
condemnation and we fear external disapproval even more, making us 
more likely to give in to the wishes of the other person, perpetuating 
the dependency cycle. 
This process persists in codependent relationships because one’s 
internal wholeness, peace with self, and well-being don’t come from a 
healthy relationship with Jesus Christ, from knowing the truth of one’s 
worth as a child of God, from developing within oneself an internal 
healthy self-judgment, or from the experience of actually choosing to do 
6
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   6Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   6 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
what one determines, in their own judgment, is best, but, instead, one’s 
internal sense of self comes from the validation and approval of others. 
The thought of losing that external validation is experienced as 
terrifying—as if one is going to die.
Imagine the case of a navy diver, the old-fashioned type 
depicted in the movie Men of Honor  starring Cuba Gooding, Jr., 
and Robert De Niro. In that movie, they wore suits with air lines to 
the surface where pumps 
delivered air to the divers 
below. If you were one of 
those men, you would be 
dependent on those on the 
surface for your air. Should 
someone on the surface 
tell you to stand on one 
foot or they would cut off 
your air, what would you 
do? And if you wanted to 
go to the right, but the ship 
turned to the left, what 
choice would you have? It 
parallels the situation in a 
dependent relationship, in which true freedom does not exist. But 
because the need is so great, intense feelings get associated with 
the one toward whom the dependence is directed.
Imagine yourself drowning underwater and then someone 
brings you an air line. Would you value that person? Would you 
have intense feelings for the individual? Would you want to hold 
on to him or her? And how would it feel if he or she decided to 
leave and take the air line with them?
Individuals can become so dependent on the emotional 
support from those on whom they rely that they experience the 
threat of losing their source of nurturance with the same fear 
and anxiety that divers would if someone threatened to cut their 
air off. It feels as if they are going to die. Because their anxiety is 
so intense, persons in dependent relationships go to extremes 
7
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   7Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   7 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
and take desperate measures to prove their “love” to the ones 
on whom they depend in order to convince them to stay. And 
if the proclamations of affection don’t get returned, often the 
dependent persons will threaten harm to themselves or even 
those on whom they cling—all designed to retain control of the 
needed person. 1
The Need for Healing
There is healing for 
people who struggle with 
dependency relationships, 
but the first steps are 
realizing that one is 
struggling with dependency 
and differentiating those 
emotions from healthy love. 
A simple test 
to determine if your 
relationship is a healthy 
love relationship—in which 
flawed people are applying 
godly principles to help 
one another overcome 
their shortcomings and to 
mature and grow versus a 
dependency relationship in which partners are only causing each other 
more emotional wounds—is to look at the list that I have included on 
the next page. Take each item and ask yourself, “Over the course of this 
relationship, compared to where I was when I entered this relationship, 
where am I today? Am I healthier or, in fact, getting worse?” 
Put a checkmark next to the appropriate statement in each column. 
Then look at the total number of checkmarks for each column; if the vast 
majority are on the dependency side, then it is highly likely that you are 
in a relationship governed by fear and insecurity rather than love.
1   Jennings, Timothy, Could It Be This Simple? A Biblical Model for Healing the Mind , 
Lennox Publishing, 2010, p. 70.
8
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   8Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   8 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
The Test: Since being in this relationship ...
Love Relationship 
___ I am emotionally and mentally healthier.
___ I have greater freedom to be me.
___  I worry less about my partner’s  
attitude toward me.
___ I give to bring joy to my partner.
___ I have much less worry and fear.
___ The relationship is stable.
___ I do most things because it is best.
___ I am honest with myself and my partner.
___ I am more patient.
___ We rarely bring up past mistakes.
If you find yourself in a codependent relationship, don’t be 
discouraged; in fact, be encouraged that you have just taken the first step 
toward health and wellness, which is recognizing and admitting the truth, 
realizing a problem exists. And now, with that awareness, you can make 
choices to heal, change, and overcome!Dependency Relationship
___ I am emotionally and mentally unhealthier.
___ I have less freedom to be me.
___  I worry more about my partner’s  
attitude toward me.
___ I give to make my partner happy with me.
___ I have more worry and fear.
___ The relationship is unstable.
___ I do most things because it feels best.
___ I shade the truth to avoid conflict.
___ I am more impatient.
___ We keep score of past wrongs.
9
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   9Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   9 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
53
41
2Steps to Breaking the Dependency Cycle
If you are in a dependency cycle, consider the following simple steps 
to deal with the fear and insecurity that dominate your decision-making:
Step 1: Go to Jesus,  right now, and tell Him 
about your fears, heartaches, wounds, 
doubts, and insecurities. He already 
knows them, but He cannot fix your heart 
without your engagement, permission, and 
cooperation. So, go to Him and tell Him all 
about your struggles. Ask Him to become 
your source of love, validation, comfort, and 
strength. Accept His offer to be your Friend, 
Comforter, Counselor, Savior, and Healer. He longs to pour His love 
into your heart. (See Romans 5:5.) Repeat this step at the beginning 
of every day and any time you are feeling lonely and afraid. 
Step 2: Choose to love truth above all things—especially feelings. 
Jesus said, “You will know the truth and the truth will set you free” 
(John 8:32). If we want to get well, to heal, we must be truthful 
with ourselves about our situation. Start with the truth of who you 
are—a child of God, wounded to be sure, but highly prized, one 
whom Jesus can heal and restore if you let Him. 
But also recognize this truth: Once 
there is brokenness, woundedness, or 
injury of any kind—there are no pain-free 
options! The only options we have after 
we are wounded are to heal or not heal, 
but the path of healing, whether setting a 
bone, cleaning dirt out of an abrasion, or 
resolving trauma issues, is accompanied 
by pain and discomfort. If we choose only that which hurts the least 
and feels the best in the moment, then we persistently choose to 
avoid healing and things will get worse. Refocus your mind and base 
your choice on the truth: “I have wounds, and my wounds can be 
healed, but only if I stop running from the discomfort, stand my 
ground, and apply the truth to my life.” 
10
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   10Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   10 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
53
4If you are confused and don’t know how to address the 
problems to bring healing, then seek professional help. Just as 
none of us would try to set a broken bone by ourselves, but would 
seek the help of an orthopedic surgeon, likewise, seek professional 
Christian counseling for your broken heart!
Step 3: Recognize that feelings can lie.  
Just because something hurts doesn’t 
mean it is harmful. Look past the feeling 
to understand why that feeling is there. 
Is the pain being caused by cleaning dirt 
out of a wound, setting a bone, or going to 
therapy? Then recognize the feelings are 
the legitimate discomfort that comes from 
resolving wounds and don’t conclude that because it feels bad, it is 
bad. Feelings must be understood in the light of objective truth!
Step 4: Apply the truth. When the feeling of 
fear arises—the fear of rejection, insecurity, 
or the internal discomfort that comes when 
the person you are currently emotionally 
dependent upon is upset with you—at that 
very moment, inside your own head, say: 
“STOP! What is the truth? Am I doing what is 
unhealthy, wrong, unreasonable, or am I doing 
what is right, healthy, and reasonable in governance of myself but my 
partner doesn’t like it?” If the answer is the latter, then apply step 5.
Step 5: Set the other person free to respond in any way they 
choose. Inside your own heart and mind say, “I give my partner 
freedom to be mad if they need to be 
mad, to pout if they need to pout, to 
shout, rage, slam doors, and get upset 
if that is the only way they can cope in 
this moment. I do not give myself the 
freedom to choose evil or to change my 
actions simply because the person I love 
11
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   11Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   11 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
86
7doesn’t like my choice. If they want me to make a different choice, 
I eagerly invite their ideas, rationale, evidence, and perspective to 
persuade me to a more rational, healthy, and mature decision—
but I will no longer make decisions in the governance of myself 
based on how another person feels or responds.” And when you 
set the other person free to have any response they choose, you 
have just set yourself free from their control over you! (If the other 
person becomes physically violent, do what is right and healthy: 
get away and call the police.)
Step 6: Differentiate imagination from 
reality. Don’t allow your imagination to 
create fantasy futures that don’t exist 
and then react to those imagined fears. 
Instead, govern your imagination to plan 
your actions based on what is objectively 
true, right, reasonable, and healthy.
Step 7: Define what is actually yours to choose, govern, or 
control—and let go of that which is not. And what is always yours 
to choose, govern, and control is yourself, 
your beliefs, your boundaries, your attitudes, 
your actions, but you are never in control of 
what other people think, feel, or how they 
respond. Learning to set others free will free 
you from the burden of worrying about their 
responses and attitudes toward you.
Step 8: Recognize that your partner’s response informs you 
about them.  Incorporate that information into an ever-expanding 
assessment of reality, of who you are 
dealing with, and then respond by applying 
that truth in your own decision-making in 
the governance of self. Set new boundaries 
by not taking the blame for another’s 
shortcomings but allowing others to hold 
responsibility for themselves. 
12
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   12Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   12 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
If you have struggled with dependency relationships, don’t be 
discouraged! I encourage you to experience hope and healing by applying 
God’s methods and principles of truth, altruistic love, and freedom to 
your life. 
And if you or someone you love is struggling with dependency 
problems and you have tried self-help solutions, outpatient counseling, 
or other interventions yet things are not improving, and you would 
like an intensive, Christ-centered holistic treatment program, consider 
Honey Lake Clinic as a therapeutic option.
Honey Lake Clinic is a holistic residential 
treatment center where we help people identify 
and resolve the underlying fears, insecurities, 
and traumas that contribute to dependency 
attachments. We treat the whole person—mind, 
body, and spirit—with proven, reality-based 
interventions that help people experience 
restoration to wellness, to harmony with the laws 
of health, the protocols upon which God has 
built life to exist and operate. 
13
www.honeylake.clinic 888.428.0562
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   13Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   13 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
The Remedy New T estament:  
Expanded Paraphrase in Everyday English
An easy-to-understand New T estament 
paraphrase that makes the gospel of God’s 
kingdom of love that Jesus lived and taught real 
and accessible. During the Dark Ages, Christian 
leaders replaced God’s love as the central pillar of 
the gospel with human law, rules, judgment, and 
punishment, teaching that God runs His kingdom 
like human governments do. This fundamentally 
altered the church that Jesus established, 
resulting in things like the Inquisition, Crusades, 
and burning people at the stake. While most Bible 
translations were done by good-hearted people, having accepted this idea 
that God’s law and government work like human law and government, they 
innocently translated into the text fear-inducing ideas about God that drive 
people away from the faith. This enlightening paraphrase by Dr. Jennings 
offers a clearer view of the true message of Jesus Christ based on the reality 
that God built His universe to operate in harmony with His nature of love. 
The Remedy will reorient your heart and mind toward God’s character of love 
and His mission to heal and restore you and all humankind!
Powerful Sharing Tracts
Come and Reason Ministries now offers thought-
provoking sharing tracts that will pique the curiosity 
of those locked into a false picture of our loving 
God and the Bible. These small, colorful, and eye-
catching tools can be shared with 
anyone at any time. Each tract reveals 
compelling, life-changing truths about 
a designer God. More topics are on the 
way, so check our website often.
DiscoverDiscover empowering resources
by Dr. Timothy Jennings to enrich your life 
and the lives of those around you!
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   14Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   14 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
Many of these resources are available for free at 
comeandreason.com. Stop by today!Biblical Concepts Made Easy
Introducing a fantastic Christian resource for parents and 
educators wanting to teach young people the profound 
lessons of God’s love and goodness through a design-law 
perspective! Authored by Stephanie Land, this engaging 
96-page activity book from Come and Reason Ministries 
imparts essential, life-changing principles in a way that 
everyone can understand. Packed with engaging activities 
and plenty of style, Biblical Concepts Made Easy  seamlessly 
conveys the last message of God’s love for humanity to 
prepare every heart for heaven. Say “goodbye” to your 
struggles in finding ways to teach these divine concepts 
to young minds—and “hello” to a fun, effective learning 
experience like you’ve never seen before!
The Lie Magazine
As you look at the world today, do you long for the 
coming of Christ? Have you seen the rise in corruption 
and abuse and wondered, “What is Jesus waiting for?” Have 
you heard sermons suggesting one reason or another 
yet been left unsatisfied? Then we invite you to read our 
newest magazine, The Lie that Deceived Angels, Infects 
Christianity, and Delays the Second Coming of Christ.
We are persuaded that one single lie persists within all 
branches of Christianity that is obstructing the gospel 
from being presented in its purest light and doing its 
final work. The latter rain is soon to be poured out, the 
entire world is settling into one of two camps, and Jesus 
is preparing His people. Now is the time to throw off the 
last lie and present God in His true glory!
Meditation: Biblical Method vs. Eastern Method
Does meditation matter in your experience and 
understanding of God? Yes—it does! In this brief but 
practical guide, Dr. Jennings teaches you to discern the 
differences between biblical and Eastern meditation, 
the divergent practices, and their impact on brain 
function and your heart and mind.
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   15Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   15 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
Doesn’t it seem like the whole world is going off the rails? Are you feeling down 
or anxious about your place, wondering how you can practice God’s design 
principles for life amid all this confusion, chaos, and contradictory information? 
Then you’ll love Designed4More! During this intriguing and enlightening 
30-minute video podcast, Timothy R. Jennings, M.D., founder of Come and 
Reason Ministries and adult medical director of Honey Lake Clinic, and various 
featured guests explore God’s design protocols (laws of health) that govern the 
four domains of life—mind, body, spirit, and relationship—and provide practical 
insights for joyful living and overcoming the obstacles and spiritual battles you 
face every day. As you listen, you’ll cherish learning just how much God designed 
you for more—more love, peace, health, and happiness!
It’s a great way to receive 
and share the good news 
about God! Available on the 
leading podcast platforms 
or link from our website at 
www.designed4more.net.present&
designed4more.net
Podcast
Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   16Codependency_Interior_2024.indd   16 7/10/24   9:43 AM7/10/24   9:43 AM
