
“What a welcome addition to Sheri Van Dijk’s dialectical behavior therapy
(DBT) books. This one incorp orates trauma work in a gentle way, drawing
on Van Dijk’s knowledge of the nervous system and how its internal parts
work. Exercises facilitate and deepen learning. Throughout the book, Van
Dijk encourages the reader to be patient, going at a pace comfortable for
them. This book is a tr easur e for the la yperson or cl inical pr ofessional. ”
—Betsy Landau, PhD , NYS-l icensed psy chologist in priv ate pr actice
“Whether used as an adjun ct to therapy or as a self-help guide, this
workbook adeptly offers readers a plethor a of practical bottom-up and
top-down strategies to support healing and wellness. Through an
integr ative approach that expertly balances psychoeducation and skills
among multiple trauma-inf ormed modal ities, the reader is provided with
therapeutic tools that support reflection, personal mean ing-making, and
ultimately meaningf ul change. ”
—Jillian Hosey, MSW, RSW, LICSW , eye movement
desensi tization and r eprocessing (EMDR) tr ainer, ISSTD f ellow, and
coeditor of The Handbook of Complex T rauma and Dissociation in
Children
“As a clinical trauma therapist, The Dialectica l Behavior Therapy Skills
Workbook for CPTSD is a must-read. This book offers a practical guide to
understanding and healing from complex trauma. It explains how trauma
affects life, and introduces DBT skills for distress tolerance, mindf ulness,
emotion regulation, and building connections. The workbook empowers
individuals to enhance their strengths and lead fulfilling lives, making it an
essential r esour ce for individuals and cl inicians. ”
—Eliza Fernandes, MSW, RSW , founder and cl inical dir ector of a
private pr actice special izing in tr auma, wi th mor e than twent y-two
years of experience in the field 
“Learning behavioral skills with Sheri Van Dijk is like learning astrophysics
from Neil deGrasse Tyson: a topic that could be compl icated to the point
of overwhelming becomes relatable, fun, and inspiring. While polyvagal
theory , DBT, and ego-state therapy each offer vital resour ces for healing
from complex trauma, it can be difficult to access them all in one place.
This workbook  offers a beauti ful synthesis of ideas and practices from all
three appr oaches. ”
—Alejandra Lindan , register ed psy chother apist in priv ate pr actice  
“Whether you are someone  looking to better understand trauma or a
seasoned therapist, this book offers invaluable insights and practical
guidance that will provide opportuni ty for reflection and enrich your
therapeutic toolki t. Through the lens of polyvagal theory , parts work, and
DBT, the author provides clarity and compassion in navigating the intricate
terrain of trauma. Each chapter is crafted with empath y and expertise.
Drawing from years of clinical experience, Sheri unravels the complexi ties
of trauma, allowing for a transformed awareness to facilitate profound
healing.”
—Jodi-Lyn Knoop, MSW, RSW , social work er and cl inical dir ector
at Turning Stones Ther apy 
“It felt as if you could hear the book speaking to you! It is a beyond
insightf ul read for individuals affected by trauma and helping professionals
alike. The book serves as a practical guide in understanding the
transformativ e impact of trauma, and provides clarity and directions for
trauma treatment. DBT skills are well detailed in supporting healing and
recovery. I can’ t wait to shar e this book wi th my clients.”
—Shivani Gupta, MSW, RSW, EMDRIA , certi fied ther apist in
EMDR; and cl inical dir ector at Oakridges Ther apy Centr e in Ontario ,
Canada
“Van Dijk has gifted us an incredible workbook that embodies the
principles of trauma work through its structur e, tone, and guidance. This
DBT skills book is the perfect companion for both therapists and clients on
the journey of healing trauma. It offers essential skills and
psychoeducation, making it an invaluable resour ce for supporting trauma
surviv ors. A must-have for anyone commi tted to trauma recovery and
healing.”
—Zainib Abdullah, MSW, RSW, RYT , founder and ex ecutiv e
director at W ellnest, a psy chother apy clinic in T oronto, Canada



This book is dedicated  to my clients: Your strength , persistence , and unwavering
commi tment  to reclaiming  your well-being  inspir e me every day. Thank  you for
allowing  me to join you on your healing journey , and for your patience  as I
continue  to learn and grow alongside  you.


CONTENTS
Part I
Introduction: What I s Trauma?
Chapter One. PT SD and Complex PT SD: Making S ense of S ymptoms
Chapter T wo. Understanding Dissociation
Chapter Thr ee
Regulating Y our Nerv ous S ystem
Part II
Chapter F our. Distr ess Tolerance Ski lls
Chapter Fiv e. Mindf ulness Ski lls
Chapter Six. Emotion R egulation Ski lls
Chapter S even. Coming to T erms wi th Trauma
Chapter Eight. The I mportance of Connections
Chapter Nine. How to I ncrease the Pleasur e in Y our Li fe
Chapter T en. Next Steps
Resour ces
References
Part I
INTRODUCTION:
What Is Trauma?
Complex  trauma . Post-traumatic  stress disorder. Developmental  trauma .
Attachment  trauma . Emotion  dysregulation . Dissociation …
If you struggle  with the aftereffects of prolonged traumatic experiences,
you’ve likely heard these and other terms before—and trust me when I say I
know how confusing they can be. Or perhaps you’re not familiar with these
terms, which can be problematic in its own way as many of the aftereffects of
trauma can be difficult to recogniz e, and often aren’t identified by healthcare
professionals, leaving people struggl ing to understand their experiences, thinking
they’re “crazy,” and f eeling hopeless about r ecovery.
Please know that there’s nothing “wrong” with you; there is hope, and there
is information and skills you can learn to help you get on the road to recovery.
That’s what this book is about.
What Is Trauma?
Psychological trauma  is a response to an event that a person finds physical ly or
emotional ly threatening or harmful and overwhelms their ability to cope. Some
authors have added that an experience is traumatic when one’s sense of self-
worth or perception of safety is damaged, one’s ability to properly attribute or
accept responsibi lity is inhibi ted, or one’s present sense of being in control or
having choices is l imited (IS STDTS 2023).
Because people experience events differently, what’s traumatic for one
person may not be for another; and while resear ch suggests that approximately
90 percent of people in the United States will have at least one exposur e to a
traumatic event in their lifetime (Kilpatrick et al. 2013), not all will experience
trauma. In a study that surveyed over 71,000 adults from twent y-six countries,
the lifetime prevalence rate of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) was 3.9
percent (Koenen et al. 2017) and as of 2024, according to the National Center
for PTSD, about six out of every one hundr ed people will experience PTSD at
some point in their l ife.
“Big T” and “Little t” Traumas
Sometimes people aren’t aware their symptoms are conne cted to traumatic events
they’ve experie nced and this is often related to confusion about what trauma is. It
can be helpful to think about two categories of trauma: “Big T” traumas are
events commo nly associated  with the more widely recognized trauma response
known as PTSD. These are typical ly events that most people would find highly
distressing or life-threatening, such as natural disasters, serious accidents,
physical or sexual assaul t, or war. You might also experience trauma in response
to a perceived threat (wher e you think there’s a danger , even if there actual ly
wasn’t) or threatened event. It can also be traumatic to witness something
happen to someone else.
“Little t” traumas, on the other hand, are distressing events that affect
individuals on a more relational level. These would be events that are not life-
threatening but that still overwhelm one’s ability to cope, like being bullied,
finding out your partner cheated on you, or experiencing humiliation in front of
your peers. Just because we refer to this as “little t” doesn’ t mean it’s less
distressing—these traumas are also very painful and can take a severe toll on
physical and emotional health. Remember , what’s distressing for one person may
not cause the same emotio nal overwhelm in someone  else, so the key to
understanding trauma is to look at how it affects the individual rather than the
event itself. Repeated exposur e to “little t” traumas can cause just as much or
even more emotional harm than a single “Big T” traumatic event. And, while a
traumatic event might be a single event, like a car crash, it may also be chronic,
such as ongoing abuse, neglect, or discrimination.
Historical trauma, when an event or prolonged experience  continues to have
an impact over several generations, is another way someone can experience
trauma. Examples include slavery, the Holocaust, cultural and racial oppression,
and forced placement in boarding schools. For example, while you’re living in the
twent y-first century as a free person, if your ancestors were enslaved, this
traumatic experience may have been passed down to you through your family’s
genes, emotions, thoughts, and so on. It’s also important to be aware that the
harmf ul effects of oppression and discrimination can add layers to trauma
experienced b y individuals.
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder or
Complex PTSD?
PTSD and complex post-traumatic stress disorder (CPTSD) are two common
diagnoses in individuals who have experienced trauma; we’ll be looking in more
detail at each of these diagnoses, including symptoms and diagnostic criteria, in
chapter one, where you’ll be able to assess which (if either) of these diagnoses
makes sense for you. For now, I’ll mention that the main difference is gener ally
the frequency of the trauma: PTSD tends to be caused  by a single traumatic
event; CPTSD is usually related to a series of traumatic events or one prolonged
event that lasts months or years. CPTSD may also include  developmental trauma,
when traumatic events occur early in life and disrupt normal sequences of brain
development.
If you think this description of CPTSD describes you, but you haven’t
received a diagnosis of CPTSD, this may be because CPTSD is not recogniz ed as
a diagn osis in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual  (DSM), the publication
largely used in North America to diagnose mental health problems. In 2018,
CPTSD was included as a diagnosis in the International Classi fication of Diseases
(ICD), published by the World Health Organization (WHO) and largely used
throughout the rest of the world. So, whether you receive a diagnosis of CPTSD
or not will depend in part on where you live and which manual is used by the
professional diagnosing y ou.
Advocates continue to work to have CPTSD included in future editions of the
DSM with many professionals working in the trauma field recognizing CPTSD as
a separate condi tion that the diagnosis of PTSD doesn’ t fully encompass.
Following are three examples to help you begin to understand “simple” PTSD,
CPTSD, and CPT SD involving dev elopmental tr auma.
PTSD: Casey
Casey w as working the night shi ft as a clerk at a con venience stor e when
two men came in wearing masks. One of them pointed a gun at Casey
and demanded she cal l her cowork ers to the f ront of the stor e. She f elt
she had no choice, and when her cowork ers came in, they wer e made to
sit on the floor whi le the r obbers r ansack ed the cash r egister and saf e. It
was over in minutes, but f elt like it lasted f or hours. They cal led the
police and, whi le the men wer e nev er caught, the thr ee cowork ers wer e
grateful no one w as hurt.
For months after the r obbery , Casey couldn’ t work. She f ound hersel f
having nightmar es, intrusiv e memories, and flashbacks, seeing the gun in
her face, and hearing the thr eatening v oices of the r obbers. Ev en though
she knew i t was over and she w as saf e, Casey had a constant f eeling of
dread and the l ingering bel ief that she w as going to die. She couldn’ t go
near the stor e without ha ving a panic at tack and she struggled wi th
anxiet y when she had to run err ands.
CPTSD: Peter
Peter had been married to Amel ia for twent y-three years; they had thr ee
children, the y oungest now sixteen. Ev eryone thought they wer e a
happy, successful couple, but what they didn’ t see w as that Amel ia’s
drinking w as out of contr ol. She w as verbally and emotional ly abusiv e to
Peter when she w as drinking and ther e wer e even times when she would
hit him. One night, in an alcohol ic rage at their son f or coming home
late, Amel ia grabbed him b y the arm and dislocated his shoulder . They
lied at the hospi tal and said he had f allen down the stairs.
Living wi th Amel ia’s drinking and her abusiv e beha vior for so long,
Peter w as constantly fi lled wi th dread. His sleep and ph ysical heal th wer e
suffering, he worried incessantly about when Amel ia would go on a
rampage again, and he w alked on eggshel ls trying to pr event this f rom
happening. P eter f elt a lot of shame—f or being in this si tuation wher e he
felt like he had no contr ol, for being a bad f ather and unable to pr otect
his chi ldren, and f or being a bad husband that Amel ia had turned to
drinking in the first place. He w as also isolating himsel f, unable to bear
the exhaustion of ha ving to pr etend al l the time, and not w anting others
to see the r eality of his l ife.
CPTSD Involving Developmental
Trauma: Marlowe
Marlowe w as the oldest of f our chi ldren and her par ents div orced when
she w as ten. She and her sibl ings sta yed wi th their mom, who w as bitter
and resentf ul and nev er let them f orget that their dad had left them. Her
words hurt them r egularly: they wer e nev er good enough, their at tempts
to help ar ound the house wer e always criticized, and she w as very vocal
about her disappointments, y elling and scr eaming her f rustrations at
them.
Now twent y-four years old, Marlowe w as beginning to r ealize that i t
wasn’t normal or ac ceptable f or her mother to dr ag her up the stairs b y
her hair , or to chok e her, just because Marlowe had done something she
didn’t like. She w as also r ealizing how neglected she and her sibl ings had
been as chi ldren, recalling her mother ’s refusal to buy her deodor ant or
shampoo and how she had often gone to school in clothes that wer e so
worn y ou could see thr ough the f abric.
As a y oung adul t, Marlowe struggled wi th feelings of worthlessness
and she had a har d time set ting heal thy limits in her r elationships wi th
others, often trying to please others at the cost of meeting her own
needs. She w as living on an emotional r ollercoaster , struggl ing wi th
depression at times, and r egularly experiencing high anxiet y.
Now that you know a bit about PTSD and CPTSD (remember , you’ll learn
more about these disorders and their symptoms in the next chapter), I’m going
to briefly introduce the idea of a tri-phasic approach to treating CPTSD before
we look at what else y ou’ll learn in this book.
Stages of Treatment for Complex Trauma
Dr. Judith Herman is the psychiatrist and scholar who proposed CPTSD as a new
diagnosis in her book Trauma and Recovery (1992) . At that time, Dr. Herman also
proposed that, when working with clients with complex trauma, therapists should
take a staged  approach to treatment. Although different authors use different
names for these stages, many agree that treatment of individuals with CPTSD
should follow this roadmap . Keep in mind that if you’re not working with a
therapist, you’ll still want to follow the basics of these three stages to make the
work y ou do as saf e and ef fective as possible.
Stage One: Safety and Stabilization
If you’re working with a therapist, this stage starts with building the
therapeutic relationship so you’ll feel safe for the trauma-pr ocessing work of
stage two. In stage one, your therapist will help you identify the issues that
brought you to therapy (with a focus on the present, rather than delving into
past traumas) and will provide education about trauma and its effects. Your
therapist will also teach you skills to manage emotions more effectively and to
create safety and stability both internal ly (for instance, eliminating suicidal, self-
harming, and self-destructiv e behaviors) and external ly (such as assisting with
stable housing, finances, or relationships). For clients who are highly dissociativ e
(which we’ll discuss in chapte r two), stage one will also focus on stabilizing the
internal system of parts (or sel f-system) thr ough parts work.
If you’re not working with a therapist, we’ll do this work in the chapters to
come. Just keep in mind that this workbook can’t replace working with a
therapist, and i f you need help , please connect wi th someone f or support.
Stage Two: Trauma Resolution
Stage two of complex trauma treatment usually happens with a therapist.
This is the stage where processing the past traumas happens such that
memories are no longer disturbing, and if necessary , trauma-based beliefs about
the sel f are addr essed.
It’s important to recogniz e that you may not be willing or able to engage in
stage two work; this will depend on your emotional, physical, and financial
resour ces—engaging in trauma resolution therapy takes time, energy, and
money . There may also be other reasons you choose not to engage in trauma
processing: you may feel you’re “well enough” after stage one and don’t want to
risk becoming destabi lized by memory processing; you may have physical health
problems or responsibi lities such as children or work; or other consider ations
that lead you to forgo stage two work. For exampl e, if you’re currently
under going medical testing for unexplained symptoms, this can be destabi lizing.
If that’s the case, you may find that doing stage one work allows you to be
sufficiently pr epared to mak e heal thy changes in stage thr ee.
Stage Three: Integration
If you do engage in stage two work, after the resolution of trauma, you’ll
likely find yoursel f more able to move on from the past by integr ating the
changes within yoursel f and your daily life, strengthening the gains you’ve made,
and focusing on longer -term goals to build a life worth living (Linehan 1993).
This includes finding fulfillment through things like building a career, developing
healthy relatio nships, and so on. Stage three might also involve addressing
identi ty-related questions such as who you are now that you’re no longer held
back by your trauma and learning problem-solving and other skills to manage
more “ordinary” pr oblems in l ife.
It’s important to remember that these stages of treatment aren’t necessari ly
linear and you may find yoursel f shifting back and forth between stages at
times.
What Stage Are You Ready For?
From the stages I’ve just described, you might already be aware of where you are
and where you’d like to be. Answer the following questio ns to help you consider
this.
Stage One: Safety and Stabilization
1. In the last thr ee months, ha ve you engaged in destabi lizing beha viors,
such as sel f-harming, suicidal beha viors, pr oblematic substance use,
disordered eating, or other sel f-destructiv e beha viors? If so , what w as the
behavior and when w as the last time y ou turned to i t?
1. Over the last thr ee months, ha ve you found y oursel f feeling out of contr ol
with emotions? F or example, lashing out at others or ha ving panic at tacks
or high anxiet y.
1. Over the last thr ee months, ha ve you found y oursel f dissociating? (If
you’re not sur e what this means, y ou can lea ve this question f or now —
we’ll look at this in mor e detai l in chapter two).
1. In the last thr ee months, ha ve you experienced external instabi lity in y our
life? For example, changes in housing or finances, abuse, bul lying,
discrimination, or har assment?

1. In the last thr ee months, ha ve you found y oursel f struggl ing to meet y our
basic heal th needs, such as sleeping too much or too l ittle, eating too
much or too l ittle, or not tr eating ph ysical heal th problems (e.g. , diabetes,
thyroid, or blood pr essure)?
1. If you responded y es to an y of the abo ve questions, y ou’re probably in
stage one and would benefi t from incr easing stabi lity before deciding
whether to mo ve to stage two . Much of this book f ocuses on stage one,
so keep reading! If y ou answer ed no to the abo ve questions, mo ve on to
the next set of questions to determine i f you’d benefi t from stage two
work.
Stage Two: Trauma Resolution
1. When y ou think of the tr auma y ou experienced, does i t feel like it’s still
happening on some lev el in the pr esent (ev en if you know logical ly it’s
not)?
1. Do you find y oursel f struggl ing in r elationships wi th others? F or example,
avoiding r elationships, often put ting others’ needs bef ore your own
(“people-pleasing”), taking r esponsibi lity for others’ emotions, or worrying
that people wi ll leave you?
1. When y ou think of the tr auma, is ther e a sense of denial of the ev ent or
imagining that i t happened to someone else?

1. When y ou think of the tr auma, do y ou blame y oursel f? Or bel ieve it
means something negativ e about y ou as a person?
If you answer ed no to these questions, you may be able to do without stage
two and move on to stage three work, so feel free to move on to questions
about stage three, or you can consider the questions in the next section. Many
of the skills in this workbook will be helpful for you in stage three, so keep
reading!
If you answer ed yes to any of these questions, you’ll likely benefi t from
stage two work. Keep in mind, howev er, that processing the trauma is typical ly
difficult work involving intens e emotions as memories are processed. Therefore,
ask yoursel f the following questions to help determine if you’re ready to do this
work:
1. Consider what kind of support y ou’ll need f rom others.
1. Do you ha ve people in y our life to support y ou whi le you do this work?
1. Are you in good ph ysical heal th?
1. Do you curr ently ha ve the time to commi t to doing this work?

1. Do you ha ve the financial means to commi t to the f ull course of ther apy?
Even if you’ve decided to move into stage two and you think you’re ready
for it based on your answers to these questions, you can never have enough
tools in y our toolbo x, so I’d suggest y ou keep reading!
Stage Three: Integration
The following questions will give you a better sense of what kind of work
you’ll need to focus on in stage three. If you know that you’re not yet ready for
this stage, I’d suggest you skip this part so you don’t become overwhelmed
thinking about  the work to come later; some of these issues may naturally be
resolved during tr auma r esolution.
1. Who ar e you now that the tr auma is no longer holding y ou back?
1. What ar e your values and bel iefs? What ’s important to y ou in l ife?
1. What ar e your goals f or the f uture?
1. What giv es you a sense of f ulfillment in l ife?

1. Are you happ y with your curr ent relationships? Do y ou ha ve enough
people in y our life and ar e these r elationships heal thy and satisf ying?
1. Are ther e relationships y ou need to look at ending? If so , do y ou ha ve the
skills to end them?
As I mentioned earlier, many of the skills in this book will help you with
stage three work as well. Now that you’re starting to get a better idea of what
your roadmap to r ecovery wi ll look l ike, let’s look at how this book wi ll help .
What You’ll Learn in This Book
The main focus of this book will be on stage one: learning about the effects of
trauma, makin g sense of your symptoms, and learning skills to help you manage
emotions more effectively. This will better position you to decide if you want to
move on to stage two, which may or may not need to happen for you to work on
stage three goals. Many of the skills you’ll learn in this book can also be used in
stage three. I’ll refer to these stages as we go to help you figure out where you
are on the roadmap . For now, let’s look at what else you’ll be learning in this book
to help on y our journey to r ecovery.
This book is divided into two parts. In part one, while you’ll learn some skills
to help you manage symptoms, the focus is on helping you understand trauma
and your symptoms and increasing acceptance and hope. Chapter one will look
more closely at the diagnoses of PTSD and CPTSD, the symptoms of each, and
the di fference between these two diagnoses.
In chapter two, you’ll learn about dissociation , one of the common
symptoms of both PTSD and, to a greater extent, CPTSD. We’ll look at one of
the theories that helps us understand how dissociat ion (as parts of the
personal ity) can develop as a surviv al mechanism in people experiencing chronic
childhood abuse or neglect. In chapter three, you’ll learn the basics of Polyvagal
Theory to help you understa nd more about the effects of trauma, and some of
the physiologic al symptoms you may be experiencing, and then we’ll look at
strategies to help y ou manage these symptoms.
In part two of this book, you’ll learn skills to help you manage the trauma
symptoms you’ve been reading about. In chapters four to nine, we’ll look at
skills from dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), a treatment created by Dr. Marsha
Linehan to help people who struggle with severe emotion dysregulation. There
are four skills modules in DBT: core mindf ulness, to help us live our lives more in
the present and increase our ability to accept whatev er we find in the present;
distress tolerance, to help us manage distress and get through crisis situations
without making  them worse; emotion regulation, which teaches us information
about emotion s as well as skills to help us manage them; and interpersonal
effectiveness, which helps us be more effective in developing and maintaining
healthy relationships.
In chapters five and seven, we’ll also look more closely at parts or self-
states to help increase awareness of your internal conflicts and experiences (this
is also commonly used in stage two treatment). Through learning and regularly
practicing these and other skills you’ll learn in this book, you’ll be more able to
manage y our tr auma symptoms.
In chapter ten, I’ll discuss some of the other therapies that have been found
to be most effective in processing trauma, which will be helpful if you choose to
move into stage two. There are also materials available for download at the
websi te for this book: ht tp://www .newharbinger .com/53103.
Who This Book Is For
Because our understanding of trauma is still developing (take, for example, the
fact that the DSM and the ICD can’t even agree on a diagn osis of CPTSD!), the
journey of individuals experiencing the consequences of trauma often remains
confusing and uncertain. I decided I needed to write this book to help clients
understand their experience of trauma, including how the multiple levels trauma
affects us, and to incorpor ate different treatment models and theoretical
perspectiv es (like Polyvagal Theory , parts work, and DBT) to address these many
layers. So, if you or someone you care about has experienced trauma, or has a
diagnosis of PTSD or CPTSD, and you want to learn more about what this means
and what to do about i t, this book wi ll be helpf ul.
If you work with people who have experienced trauma, I believe this book
will also speak to you by providing a lens through which to see your clients to
help them make sense of their often- confusing symptoms. By increasing our
understanding of the consequences of trauma on the body and mind, we can
help our clients understand themselv es, which often leads to an increase in self-
compassion. Much of the time, not having self-compassion is one of the many
consequences of complex tr auma, which only perpetuates individuals’ suf fering.
Whatev er your reasons for reading this book, I thank you for joining me on
this journey .
CHAPTER ONE.
PTSD and Complex PTSD: Making
Sense of Symptoms
If you’re still reading, you’re clearly dealing with some kind of trauma or helping
people who are, so I’m sure I don’t have to tell you how compl icated trauma can
be. But did you know that people often have symptoms they don’t connect to
events from their past? People may have had experiences they don’t recogniz e
as traumatic —usual ly, these ar e the “l ittle t” traumas I mentioned.
In this chapte r, we’ll delve more deeply into the symptoms of PTSD and
CPTSD to help you understa nd your own experiences better. We’ll also look at
the idea of developmental trauma  and its connection to adverse childhood
experiences (ACEs).
As you read through this information, you may find yourself struggl ing with
intense emotio ns at times. When you find that happening, please be sure to take
good care of yoursel f—put the book down if things become too distressing or
uncomf ortable. If you find this happening often, or in a way that’s disrupting
your life, you might skip ahead to chapters four, five, and six, where you’ll learn
skills to help you better manage the emotions arising.  Remember , if you’re
currently in stage one of treating your complex trauma, safety and stabilization
are the priori ty.
It’s also important for you to know that suicidal thoughts or urges to hurt
onesel f aren’t uncommon when you’ve experienced trauma. If you’re having
thoughts of suicide, please contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at
988 for support. If you or a loved one are in immediate danger , please call 911.
You’re not alone—help is a vailable.
PTSD Versus CPTSD
In the last chapter , I mentio ned that CPTSD is not currently a diagnosis in the
DSM but it was included in the most recent edition of the ICD. This illustrates the
ongoing controversy regarding the diagnosis of CPTSD, with some academics
believing there’s not enough of a difference between the two disorders to warrant
a separate category of CPTSD. Unfortunately , this often leads to people receiving
diagnoses such as major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, or an anxiet y
disorder that doesn’ t acknowledge the roots of difficulties in traumatic
experiences. Whether you’ve received diagnoses such as these or a diagnosis of
CPTSD (or perhaps you haven’t received a diagnosis at all, but you recogniz e that
you’re experiencing the fallout of trauma), our discussion must start with PTSD. In
the following section, you’ll answer some questions to help you better understand
what y ou’re deal ing wi th.
Symptoms of PTSD
The first requirement for a diagnosis of PTSD is that you’ve experienced
some kind of shocking, scary, or danger ous event. Many healthcare professionals
recogniz e the problem with this criterion since what is traumatic for one person
may not be for the next. This will also depend on the developmental stage of the
person experie ncing the trauma. For instance, this criterion will often lead to
people who have experienced attachment wounding being ineligible for a
diagnosis of CPTSD; howev er, for a child, being left to cry alone for hours in their
bedroom would possibly be experienced as a shocking or scary event. Keeping
these things in mind, consider the traumatic events you’ve experienced. If you’d
like, you can write the events here, although I’d suggest simply giving them a
title (for instance, “my car accident ” or “childhood abuse”) rather than including
details.
Following is a list of the three categories of PTSD symptoms according to
the ICD (Cloitre et al. 2018). Put a check beside the symptoms you’re
experiencing.
Reexperiencing Symptoms
Distressing dr eams or nightmar es of or r elated to the tr aumatic ev ent
Flashbacks (powerf ul memories) or intense images that come into y our
mind in which y ou feel you’re reliving the experience
Avoidance
Avoiding internal r eminders of the experience (thoughts, f eelings, and
physical sensations)
Avoiding external r eminders of the experience (people, places,
conversations, or si tuations)
Sense of Threat
Startling easi ly or f eeling jump y
Feeling hyper-alert, w atchful, or on guar d
The above symptoms are only consider ed symptoms of PTSD if they
significantly impact your life in terms of relationships, daily activities, or work.
Keep in mind, howev er, that you’re not looking to self-diagnose but to increase
your understanding of what ’s going on f or you. Let ’s look now at CPT SD.
Symptoms of CPTSD
To receive a diagnosis of CPTSD, you must first meet the criteria of PTSD.
The additional symptoms of CPTSD—r eferred to as disturbances of self-
organization —follow. Put a check mark beside the ones y ou experience.
Difficulties managing emotions (such as exploding in anger , feeling numb or
“shutdown, ” having di fficulties calming or soothing y oursel f after a str essor)
Having a negativ e self-view (f or example, bel ieving y ou’re worthless or “a
failure;” feeling di fferent from other people; f eelings of helplessness, gui lt,
or shame)
Having di fficulties in r elationships or f eeling close to others (such as
avoiding r elationships or dev eloping unheal thy relationships simi lar to those
from your past)
CPTSD usually results from experiencing multiple traumatic events or
prolonged exposure to trauma, and the trauma is often interpersonal in nature—
that is, resulting from mistreatment by another person. Examples of common
traumas in CPTSD include child abuse, neglect, or abandonment; domestic
violence; bullying; tortur e; being a refugee separ ated from family and country;
and discrimination.
Not everyone who experienc es these kinds of events will develop PTSD or
CPTSD: some people who experience a single-ev ent trauma may develop CPTSD
and some people who have experienced ongoing or recurring trauma may
develop PTSD. Factors that increase the risk of CPTSD include the harm having
been caused by someone close to you; being in a situation where escape or
rescue was unlikely or impossible; growing up without a stable life structur e
(Gold 2008); and experiencin g trauma at an early age, which leads to our next
concepts: adv erse chi ldhood experiences and dev elopmental tr auma.
Adverse Childhood Experiences
In 1998, resear chers mailed a questionnair e to 13,494 adults in the United States,
inquiring about their experience of seven adverse childhood experiences (ACEs):
psychological, physical, or sexual abuse; violence against mother; or living with
people who used substances, had a mental i llness, or wer e imprisoned.
Based on the responses they received, the resear chers found a strong
relationship between exposur e to ACEs and heightened risk for seven of the ten
leading causes  of death in adults in the United States as well as increased risk of
depression and suicide (Felitti et al. 1998). This led to the development of the
Adverse Childhood Experiences Scale, often used by healthcare providers as it
recogniz es the toll that trauma takes on us emotional ly as well as physical ly. You
may be interested to know that this resear ch continues and different adverse
experiences have been studied in diverse populations, leading to an expanded
version of the ACEs that includes experiences such as bullying, discrimination,
and ha ving l ived in f oster car e (Pachter et al. 2017).
Let’s look at how these ACEs contribute to CPT SD.
Developmental Trauma
Developmental trauma  (van der Kolk 2005) refers to complex trauma that occurs
during the developmental stages of childhood or adolescence. This is often
referred to as attachment trauma , as it commonl y occurs in relationships with
caregivers when the child’s sense of safety and trust is damaged through abuse,
neglect, or unpredictable care from a primary caregiver. Examples of
developmental trauma include physical or sexual assaul t or witnessing domestic
violence. But this type of trauma also includes the “little t” traumas, such as
disruptions of protectiv e caregiving, and pervasive invalidation— when people
around you continual ly convey that your experience doesn’ t matter or is somehow
wrong (Lineha n 2014). As noted earlier, these “little t” traumas can seem life-
threatening for a child given their reliance on others for surviv al, especial ly when
the ev ents ar e ongoing or r epetitive.
While some developmental traumas may result from intentional behavior
(such as abuse ), this can also be related to circumstances beyond a caregiver’s
control, as in the f ollowing examples:
A child is mor e sensi tive and has higher emotional needs than the r est of
the family and the f amily continuously struggles to understand and support
them
A caregiver is emotional ly una vailable or absent (f or example, a par ent
works eight y-hour weeks; is hospi talized for a pr olonged period or on
several different oc casions; or gr ew up in a f amily wher e it wasn’t
acceptable to expr ess emotions, so they don’ t have the ski lls to deal wi th
emotions in their own chi ldren)
A par ent relying on the chi ld for emotional support
While developmental trauma is not an official diagnosis in the DSM or the
ICD, it’s important for us to be aware of it for a number of reasons: Since
traumatic events occur during the time of life when the brain is still developing,
healthy, norma tive developme nt might not occur and the brain instead adapts to
the trauma it faces. For example, studies have shown that the amygdala (the
alarm center of the brain) is larger in youth who have grown up in hostile
environments (Picci et al. 2022); levels of stress hormones are also higher
(Bevans et al. 2008). These differences can be seen as helping the youth surviv e
the difficult circumstances faced at the time, but they can contribute to ongoing
problems that may result in inaccurate diagnoses, such as ADHD , bipolar
disorder, and opposi tional defiant disorder, leading to inappr opriate treatments
(which can include medicatio ns that may be unnecessary for some individuals)
rather than therapy to address the trauma they’ve experienced (van der Kolk
2005). Developmental trauma can also result in a child growing up with low self-
esteem and self-worth, feelings of shame, and ongoing difficulties with
relationships and emotion r egulation as wel l as other symptoms of CPT SD.
One more thing that will be helpful for you to know: even if traumatic
events happen ed at such a young age that you can’t recall them, they can still
have long-term  negativ e consequences (such as symptoms of PTSD and CPTSD)
since developm ental trauma affects the development of the brain. This is how,
as Dr. Bessel van der Kolk (2014) says, “the body keeps the score”: our body
remembers even when we don’t have the words to go along with the memory .
When we’re having an implicit memory (a memory for which we don’t have
explicit, cogni tive recall), we experience emotions, physical sensations, and
urges without recognizing the influence of the past on our present. This is what
people sometimes r efer to as an “emotional flashback. ”
So, when you don’t understand why you have a panic attack when someone
tries to hug you, for example , it’s possible that this is your body remembering a
trauma (it could also be related to your fear of germs, of course, but if you have
trauma in your past, it’s important to consider!). We’ll explore some of these
physiological responses in chapter three and you’ll learn some ways to work with
them.
Now that you have a better idea of what these different terms mean and
how they may apply to you, let’s consider why some people develop PTSD,
others develop CPTSD, and others don’t experience a trauma response at all in
the face of the same ev ents.
Activity: Risk Factors for Trauma
In the following activity, you’ll consider some of the different factors that increase
your likelihood of developing  a trauma response. If you’ve experienced more than
one traumatic event, you can answer the questions for those events gener ally, you
can write your answers on a separ ate worksheet for each trauma you’ve
experienced (I would recommend against this if you’ve had more than two single-
event traumas ), or you can come up with a way that feels most comfortable for
you. Remember to be aware of yoursel f as you go through this exercise and put it
aside i f you need to . You can alw ays return to i t later .
1. Family History
If you have a family history of mental health problems, your risk of
developing PTSD or CPTSD is increased. What do you know about your
family history?
1. Ongoing Stress
Experiencing ongoing stress at the time of a traumatic event contributes to
your risk of developing a trauma response. Consider any destabilizing
events or ongoing stressors at the time of the events (such as financial or
housing instability , the break-up of a relationship, or being a primary
caregiver for a child with special needs or an elderly parent).

1. Poor Coping Skills
People who don’t have healthy coping skills are generally at higher risk for
developing a trauma response. Do you have healthy ways of managing
distress (like exercising, talking to friends, or distracting yourself in healthy
ways)? Or do you turn to unhealthy ways of coping (like using food,
substances, or other problematic behaviors to avoid emotions)? W rite your
thoughts about how you were coping at the time of the events here:
1. History of Substance Use
People with a history of substance use also have a heightened risk for PTSD
or CPTSD. Did this apply to you when you experienced the events?
1. The Supports You Have After the Events
Research has consistently shown that having a warm and supportive social
network (including family , friends, and helping professionals) makes a
trauma response less likely . What do you recall about your support system
after the events?
1. Interpretations and Perceptions of the Events
The way we think about an event also contributes to our vulnerability to
developing a trauma response. What were your thoughts and beliefs about
what happened? Include any judgmental or blaming thoughts (toward
yourself or others), as well as any meaning you made of the events (such as
thinking “This happened to me because I deserved it” or “Sometimes, bad
things happen to good people”).
1. History of Developmental Trauma
Developmental trauma af fects the healthy development of the brain, which
can leave you more vulnerable to emotion dysregulation and contribute to
difficulties with assertiveness, setting healthy limits, and so on. W rite your
thoughts about how this might apply to you here:

Take a moment to consider y our responses to these questions. What ar e your
thoughts about y our risk f actors f or dev eloping a tr auma r esponse? Describe an y
thoughts and emotions that ha ve come up f or you:
I mentioned earlier that I’m not trying to help you self-diagnose but to
understand your experience better. I’ll also point out that many surviv ors of
trauma don’t meet the criteria for PTSD and they may still be experiencing
consequences of the trauma, such as difficulties managin g emotions, substance
use issues, eating disorders, and chronic physical health problems. If you’re
finding yoursel f fitting into this category as you’re reading through these various
symptoms, please know that you can still benefi t from the information and skills
you’ll be learning in this book, so k eep reading!
If you are resonating with what you’re reading here, then you’re obviously
on the right track. In the next chapter , you’ll learn about dissociation and how
it’s possible for human beings  to so effectively protect themselv es from a trauma
that they actual ly forget it ever happened (at one extreme), or to
compartmental ize it so they can go about their normal life in spite of it. Even if
you don’t think this applies to you, I’d encour age you to keep reading since we
don’t know what we don’t know. I often work with clients with a trauma history
who don’t have a full understanding of their symptoms. I’ve also learned the
hard way in my work that dissociativ e symptoms are often overlook ed by mental
health professionals, so you may find you’re more able to make sense of your
experience through this lens. Please remember to keep taking good care of
yoursel f as you go: this is hard work and our number one goal is getting you
stable and k eeping y ou ther e.
Wrapping Up
In this chapter , you’ve been learning about trauma— what it is and the difference
between PTSD and CPTSD—and you’ve learned to identi fy some of the symptoms
associated with these diagnoses. You’ve also had the opportuni ty to learn about
developmental trauma and to consider some of the factors that may have
heightened your risk for developing a trauma response. One of the most
important pieces in stage one of trauma treatment is learning about trauma and
its negativ e consequences; while this can be uncomf ortable, I hope that over time
you’ll find it validating to know that this is an ordinary response to the
extraordinary events you’ve experienced— and that you’re not alone with these
symptoms.
In the next chapter, you’ll continue to learn about symptom s of trauma, with
a specific focus on dissociation—experiences that are complex and can be
frightening. If at any time what you’re reading starts to evoke emotions that are
too distressing, please be sure to do some self-care; you can also turn to chapter
four, which wi ll teach y ou some ski lls to help y ou bet ter manage distr ess.
CHAPTER TWO.
Understanding Dissociation
You may already be familiar with the term dissociation, and you may have a
good understanding of how this shows up in your life (or doesn’ t!). But just as
we’ve been learning more and more about trauma over recent decades, so too
do we continue to learn more about dissociation, includin g how to define it and
understand how and why it happens. Contr oversy remains about certain
dissociativ e experiences as does a lack of understanding and awareness of these
processes.
My goal in this chapter , therefore, is to help you understand what
dissociation is, that it can happen in different ways, and that the term
“dissociation” itself refers to a broad range of experiences. Then we’ll look at
ways you might be experiencing this phenomenon. In the second part of this
chapter , you’ll learn more about how and why dissociation may have developed
for you, and in the second part of this book, we’ll get to skills to help you
increase awareness of these experiences so you’ll be more able to do something
about them. First, let ’s arm y ou wi th information.
What Is Dissociation?
The answer to this question is compl icated as there is still not one agreed-upon
defini tion, so we’ll start here: According to the International Society for the Study
of Trauma and Dissociation (ISSTD), dissociation involves “the total or partial loss
of awareness or knowledge,  inner body sensation, five-sense perception (sight,
hearing taste, touch, and smell), emotions, thoughts, perceptions, explicitly
recallable memories, impulses, and/or one’s sense of self” (ISSTDTS 2023, 27). In
other words, there are lots of ways dissociation can occur, but it involves a
disconnect between y ou and y our pr esent experience.
Dissociation occurs on a spectrum: there is “normal”  dissociation that
everyone has at times— when you’re driving and you suddenly realize you don’t
remember part of the drive or you’re so absorbed in reading a book that you’re
unaware of what’s happen ing around you. These are examples of non-
pathological dissociation.
But what if you sometimes feel like you’re disconnecte d from the world
around you or like you’re a robot someone else is controlling? Or you’re going
about your day and you suddenly realize an hour has gone by and you have no
idea what happened during that time? These are some of the problematic (not
to mention scary!) ways dissociation can happen. While dissociation is, of
course, a symptom of dissociativ e disorders (such as dissociativ e identi ty
disorder, or DID), dissociatio n can also be a symptom of PTSD and CPTSD and
commonly occurs in people  with other diagnoses as well, like depression,
anxiet y, and borderline personal ity disorder (BPD). Dissociation can be
frightening, especial ly if you’re convinced that it means something about you as
a perso n (like, I’m crazy); understanding your experi ence can help you be less
fearful of i t.
Activity: Experiencing Dissociation
Following is a brief description of the five main dissociativ e processes, followed by
some statements. Consider each statement carefully: if you’ve never experienced it
or if you don’t understand the statement (it likely doesn’ t apply to you), leave it
blank. If y ou’ve ever experienced i t, put a check beside i t.
Depersonalization
This is the sense of being disconnected from or “not in” your body, or feeling
detached from yoursel f in some way (“This is not me”). This might entail
experiences that are hard for you to put into words; for example, one client I
worked with kept telling me she felt “anxious, ” but she didn’t report feeling worried
or afraid. When she told me she felt “as though someone else is in my body,” we
realized this w as depersonal ization.
I’ve felt as though I’m standing next to myself or watching myself do something
as if I was looking at another person.
I’ve looked in the mirror and not recognized myself.
Parts of my body have felt as though they didn’t belong to me.
My body has felt very light, as if it were floating on air .
When I’ve cried or laughed, I seemed to not feel any emotions at all.
When I moved, it seemed as though I was not in charge of my movements, so I
felt like a robot.
Derealization
In derealization, the world seems unreal or dreamlike, foggy, or distant. One of my
clients described her experience of this as f eeling “like I’m in a video game. ”
I’ve felt like other people, objects, or the world in general were not real.
I’ve felt as though I was looking at the world through a fog, with people or
objects appearing far away or unclear .
It’s seemed as if things I’ve recently done took place a long time ago (for
example, something I did earlier in the day felt like I had done it weeks ago).
Objects around me have looked smaller or farther away .
Previously familiar places or people have looked unfamiliar , as if I’d never seen
them before.
Amnesia
Different from routine forgetfulness,  dissociativ e amnesia is when you have no
memory of something, either in the recent or distant past. This might show up as
having no memory before a certain age. For example, one of my clients was
abused by her brother from age twelve to eighteen. She had told me her brother
was coming to visit, but when I asked about this in our next session, she couldn’ t
remember i f the visi t had happened.
I’ve found myself in a place with no idea of how I got there.
I’ve found evidence that I’ve done things I have no memory of (like errands or
sending an email to someone).
Others have told me of things that I had done, but I had no memory of doing
those things.
I’ve “lost time,” with no memory of what happened during that period (blank
spells or blackouts).
There have been times when I haven’t recognized family members or close
friends.
Identity Confusion
This is when you feel as though your identity has shifted and you don’t have a
good sense of who you are, what your values are, what you like and dislike, and so
on. For example, one of my clients would have thoughts of acting violently toward
people, but the thoughts were disturbing for him because they didn’t match his
values and who he w anted to be.
I’ve felt confused or puzzled by the way I feel, or by things I’ve said or done.
I’ve felt divided, like I had several independent “parts” or aspects of myself.
I’ve often felt like I’m “dif ferent” from myself.
At times, my thoughts and emotions have been so changeable I didn’t
understand myself.
I’ve experienced a struggle inside myself regarding what to think, feel, or do.
Identity Alteration
At its extreme, this is where a person has DID and shifts to a different part (or self-
state) that may not know where they are, how old they are, and so on. But this can
also happen in less extreme ways: like feeling as though there’s a different part of
you acting at times, and that part doesn’ t feel like the real you. For example, one
of my clients will suddenly feel hersel f shutting down and can explain that she feels
“childlike,” but she doesn’ t have awareness of what she’ s feeling or wh y.
I’ve felt like I have “someone else” inside or like I’m more than one person.
I’ve heard voices inside my head, telling me what to do or commenting on
things I’m doing.
I’ve felt like someone or something else takes over at times, and I have no
control over myself.
I’ve been confused about how old I am or where I am.
I’ve noticed dif ferent parts of myself reacting to these questions.
Take a momen t to consider what it was like to read about these dissociativ e
phenomena: Was there a sense of relief as you learned that some of your
symptoms can be explained by dissociation? Or perhap s fear, shame, or other
painful emotio ns if you related to some of these symptoms? You might have
noticed conflicting thoughts and emotions and felt like there was more than one
part of you responding to the questions—perhaps one part of you wanting to deny
the dissociativ e experience and another part wanting to acknowledge it. Perhaps
you didn’t relate to any of these symptoms, or you’re already familiar with these
experiences of dissociation within yoursel f. Whatev er you notice, do some self-care
if needed; and then mak e some notes her e:

Now that you’re starting to understand what dissociation is, let’s look at its
purpose and how i t can help us.
Dissociation in Response to Trauma
Dissociation is an adaptiv e mechanism that helps us surviv e. It develops as a
defense against a perceived threat, resulting in overwhel ming experiences being
split off from and held outside of our conscious awareness. This is why, as Dr.
Bessel van der Kolk says, “Dissociation is the essence of trauma” (2014 , 66). What
better way for our brain to protect us from a traumatic experience than for it to
cut us off from the experience altogether? This is also why dissociation can take
many forms—because tr auma does, too . Let’s look at an example.
Marguerite’s Story
Marguerite started ther apy at the age of twent y-five when she took a
leave from her post -graduate studies because she w as struggl ing to
function. Her sleep w as suf fering because she w as ha ving panic at tacks
and nightmar es at night; during the da y, she w as reliving things that had
happened in her chi ldhood.
At the age of fiv e, Mar guerite’s older br other started sexual ly and
physical ly abusing her . She r ecalled feeling “float y” during the abuse,
being outside of her body and unable to f eel what w as happening
(depersonal ization). Mar guerite told her par ents about the abuse, but
they told her to “stop lying. ” So, not only did she ha ve to deal wi th the
abuse f rom her br other but she also had to suf fer thr ough her par ents’
denial and neglect. A t times, Mar guerite would look at her f amily and f eel
like she w as surr ounded b y strangers, or she’d be si tting in her bedr oom
and experience her surr oundings as str ange and unf amiliar
(derealization).
Marguerite recalled she alw ays look ed forward to going to school
because that w as one place she f elt safe. She described being miser able
at breakfast time, ha ving to si t across the table f rom her br other, who
had abused her the night bef ore, but then she’d get on the bus and
forget what had happened at home (amnesia). The abuse went on unti l
Marguerite left home f or col lege at the age of eighteen, and i t was only
then she began r emembering what had happened to her al l those y ears.
Speaking wi th her ther apist about the y ears of abuse, Mar guerite
recounted her struggle to understand hersel f. For instance, she f elt
conflicted about ha ving a r elationship wi th her par ents (identi ty
confusion): One part of her bel ieved her f amily should alw ays come first,
but another part of her hated her br other f or the pain he had caused and
her par ents f or not pr otecting her , resulting in internal confl ict. She’d find
hersel f on the phone wi th her mother , agreeing to visi t even though she
didn’t want to and f eeling like she w asn’t in contr ol of hersel f (identi ty
alteration).
Activity: How Did Dissociation Help You?
Following is a list of the dissociative processes we looked at earlier. For each of the
processes you experience, write your thoughts about how this helped you surviv e
the traumatic experiences or how you might otherw ise make sense of the
symptom. I’ve used Marguerite as an example. Remember to take your time and
put this aside if emotions get too intense. If you don’t experience any of these
symptoms, f eel free to mo ve on to the next section.
Depersonalization
How has not being in your body helped you surviv e? (Marguerite escaped
emotional and ph ysical pain b y not being in her body .)
Derealization
How has discon necting from the world around you helped you surviv e? (Marguerite
was able to not f eel the pain of her par ents’ in validation and betr ayal.)

Amnesia
How has not remembering helped you surviv e? (Amnesia helped Marguerite go
about her dai ly life whi le she continued to l ive with her abusers. )
Identity Confusion
How has acting in inconsistent ways helped you surviv e? (As a child, Marguerite
had to stay connected to her parents since she relied on them for surviv al—this
meant sta ying quiet about the abuse to not risk punishment or r ejection. )
Identity Alteration
How has having other parts of your personal ity helped you surviv e? (Marguerite
had to do or say things to stay connected to her parents, like keeping up the
pretense of being a “happ y family,” even when she didn’t believe or like what she
was saying or doing. )

If you identi fied some of these pr ocesses happening wi thin y ou at times, what w as
this like? Mak e some notes her e about an ything that came up f or you:
Remember , we’ll look at skills to help with these experien ces in the second
part of this book, but increasing your awareness of these experiences is the first
step in healing and recovery. Now, let’s look at a theory to help us make further
sense of an extreme dissociativ e phenomenon: when the personal ity itself is
dissociated or f ragmented.
Theory of Structural Dissociation of the
Personality
There are different models that explain how dissociation develops in response to
trauma, and there’s likely more than one path that leads to this phenomenon. I’m
going to focus on the Theory of Structur al Dissociation of the Personal ity, or SDP
(van der Hart et al. 2006) , because it does a nice job of explaining how
dissociation of the personal ity is a surviv al response to trauma and extreme stress
in childhood, which, as you know, is common in CPTSD. If this doesn’ t apply to
you, don’t worry —in the next chapter , we’ll look at another theory that also
explains this.
The reality is that most people have experienced some degree of
psychological wounding, so we all have parts of our personal ity; we might also
refer to parts as self-states , aspects of ourselv es, or ego states . Essen tially,
these terms refer to how we think, feel, and act changes across time and
contexts. We can see this in the language we use at times: “One part of me
wants to do this, but anothe r part of me wants to do that.” We also saw this in
the earlier story of Marguerite, who would value or believe one thing, but then
not act in ac cordance wi th that v alue or bel ief. Here are some other examples:
Feeling angry wi th your partner whi le also being conf used b y why you’re
feeling this w ay (“They didn’ t do an ything wr ong, wh y am I so mad?”)
Sharing inf ormation y ou’d pr efer to k eep to y oursel f, but f eeling unable to
stop
Acting in a w ay you know y ou’ll regret later —for example, using
substances, engaging in sel f-harm, or gossiping
Can y ou think of times when y ou’ve been a ware of di fferent parts of y oursel f?
Make some notes her e:
We’ll be looking further at parts of the personal ity, as well as how we can
heal from trauma using this perspectiv e, at different points in this book. For now,
while most of us can probably relate to having parts to some extent, it’s
important to understand that with structur al dissociation, we’re moving beyond
these self-states: there’s a lack of integr ation in the personal ity and the self is
split into parts that have their own perspectiv es, emotions, and thoughts. A
person’ s early life experience s (think ACEs) and development (including genes)
are two factors that play roles in structur al dissociation. If you had a relatively
safe, secure, and consistent  childhood, your personal ity will have been more
likely to fully develop and you’ll be more likely to have a sense of self that feels
integr ated and whole.
To clarify, we’re not talking specifically about DID. Often, when it comes to
parts of the personal ity, people think of that extreme, but people with CPTSD,
PTSD, and other disorders can also experience structur al dissociation. It’s also
important to remember that dissociativ e parts of the personality are not actual ly
separ ate personal ities but rather are different parts or aspects of personal ity that
are not (y et) working together cooper atively (Fisher 2017).
SDP is referred to as structur al dissociation because the creators of this
theory propose that psychological dissociation happens along the fault lines of
different brain structur es that would, as a course of normal development,
communicate with one anoth er (An in-depth description of this is beyond the
scope of this book, so check out the Further Reading section if you want to know
more). When developmental trauma results in structur al dissociation, these parts
of the brain split off from one another as a means of surviv al, allowing for more
flexible respon ses to a danger ous environment. Although this is a surviv al
mechanism, it results in the personal ity fragmenting, where one part (the normal
life part) keeps on going as though nothing has occurred and other parts
(trauma parts) r emain alert f or the next bad thing to happen.
The Normal Life Part
The normal life part (Fisher 2017) focuses on living life in the present, avoiding
reminders of the trauma in order to focus on taking care of physical needs like
sleeping and eating, going to work or school, attachment, social interaction, and
other aspects of daily life. This part usually has little or no awareness of the
trauma and is focused on what needs to be done today. Think again of Marguerite
—she was experiencing daily abuse at home, yet her normal life part was still
getting up and eating breakfast with the family, going to school, and doing other
things l ike swimming lessons and sleepo vers.
Trauma Parts
The trauma part of the personal ity (Fisher 2017) holds information related to the
trauma (body memories, emotions, thoughts, beliefs, and so on), so this part is
fearful that the trauma will happen again and remains on the lookout for danger .
Trauma parts will be trigger ed by implicit or explicit reminders of the trauma and
are often characteriz ed by intense painful emotions. We can see a trauma part (or
perhaps more than one) in Marguerite’s reports of having nightmar es, panic
attacks, and flashbacks.
Primary  structu ral dissociation is gener ally experienced in PTSD and involves
a single normal life part and a single trauma part. Secondary  structur al
dissociation involves a single normal life part and multiple trauma parts and is
more likely to be seen in CPTSD or BPD. In tertiary  structur al dissociation, there
are multiple normal life parts and multiple trauma parts (this is DID). The last
piece we’ ll look at her e is what tr auma parts ar e from an SDP perspectiv e.
Trauma Parts as Defenses
Developing early in life, defense responses  help us surviv e. You’re probably
familiar with three of these already: fight, flight, and freeze. But we also have two
others: submi t and attach (or cry for help). According to SDP, these defense
systems are another fault line around which trauma parts form— when a defense
response such as “fight ” is activated by a trauma that overwhelms our ability to
cope, a self-state may form based on that defense response. So, in this example,
we would end up wi th a “fight part. ”
Following is a description of trauma parts from an SDP perspectiv e. As you
read about each of these and the examples provided, consider your own
experience and make some notes about any parts that seem familiar to you.
Remember to prioritize self-care and take a break if things become too difficult,
but it may also help to keep in mind as you read this information that, if you
relate to some (or all!) of these, your parts helped you surviv e and are trying to
protect y ou, ev en now .
The Fight Part
A fight part is usually on the lookout for threat, meaning this part will
typical ly be mistrustf ul of others and ready to keep people at arm’s length to
protect you. Fight parts may be angry , controlling, judgme ntal, and blaming, and
will often have a hand in self-harming, suicidal, and other self-destructiv e
behaviors, as wel l as aggr ession tow ard others.
Example: Cory r ecalls first thinking of suicide when he w as twelv e years
old. He had a v ery contr olling father who didn’ t understand Cory ’s
depression and pushed Cory to do bet ter in school, pla y mor e sports,
take on mor e responsibi lities, and so on, unti l Cory final ly found escape
through f antasizing about taking his l ife. Now , Cory is thirt y years old and
finds himsel f thinking about suicide when he f eels like he has no contr ol,
even though he knows he’ s an adul t and has choices he didn’ t have as a
child.
What do y ou know about y our fight part?

The Flight Part
A flight part is looking to escape. This might be seen through a person
being avoidant, distant, ambivalent, or unable to make commi tments. Flight
parts often turn to addictions, disordered eating, and other behaviors that
provide escape f rom painf ul emotions, thoughts, and sensations.
Example: Karmen r ecently left her marriage to an abusiv e and
controlling partner . She had been using drugs f or a long time to manage
her emotional pain, but ha ving final ly got ten clean f rom these, she now
finds hersel f alternating between r estricting f ood and bingeing. She
doesn’ t want to do these things but f eels like she has no contr ol over
hersel f.
What do y ou know about y our Fl ight P art?
The Freeze Part
A freeze part is fearful, will often isolate themselv es or feel paralyzed, and
at the extreme may fear leaving the home. High levels of anxiet y and panic
attacks ar e common, as wel l as nightmar es and flashbacks.
Example: Jhavid reports constant f eelings of anxiet y and dai ly panic
attacks. B ullied in school f or being the only person of color and gr owing
up wi th thr ee older br others who teased him r elentlessly f or being mor e
sensitive, Jha vid sti ll feels like nowher e is saf e.
What do y ou know about y our freeze part?
The Submit Part
This part is the opposi te of the fight part and will often present as passiv e,
people-pleasing, and self-sacri ficing, trying to be “good. ” Inside, howev er, this
part often experiences shame, hopelessness, sel f-hatred, and depr ession.
Example: Marval recalled that her mother w as alw ays yelling at her
when she w as a chi ld, and ev en at age fi fty-five, she alw ays feels like
she’s doing something wr ong. She goes out of her w ay to please others
and mak e them l ike her, even when that means r egularly put ting aside
her own needs and w ants. She also has a habi t of o ver-apologizing,
constantly f eeling ashamed and not good enough.
What do y ou know about y our submi t part?
The Attach Part
An attach part feels lonely and yearns for connection to others. This part is
often childlike, wants to be liked by others, wants to have others to care for
them, and f ears abandonment.
Example: Sam w as seeing their new ther apist, Sha yne, once a week
and felt very connected to him, but Sam f ound they had a str ong need to
reach out to Sha yne between sessions. Sam w as reaching out mul tiple
times a da y by emai l or text and when Sha yne told Sam he would only
respond to them once a da y moving f orward, Sam f elt very hurt and
alone.
What do y ou know about y our at tach part?
Normal life parts and trauma parts often interact in conflicting ways, which
can lead to difficulties with emotion regulation and relationships with self and
others. For instance, if you find yoursel f struggl ing to read this section— zoning
out, being easily distracted, or judging what you’re reading—this may be an
indicator that one or more of your parts is being activated by the idea of
acknowledging that you have different parts! Confusing, I know, but there is
good reason for this: Remember , parts were created to protect you, and they
may believe you still need protecting. In this case, thinking that the less you
know about your own interna l system, the better. If this still isn’t making sense,
don’t worry—we’ll be doing some work with your parts in chapter seven when
we look at coming to terms wi th trauma.
Wrapping Up
If you’re relating to what you’ve read in this section, remember this is just the
start of your journey , and that knowledge is power . Hopef ully, any confusion,
shame, fear, or other emotio ns related to experiences of dissociation and parts
will start to reduce as you start to understand them and see that these processes
are adaptiv e and helped y ou to surviv e the tr aumas.
Of course, now that you’re an adult, these defense mechanisms are likely no
longer serving you and may even be limiting your ability to live life as you would
like (for instance, at times, you may feel “spaced out,” disconnected, detached).
In the next chapter, you’ll learn about Polyvagal Theory, which will help you
make sense of some of the other symptoms you may be experiencing and then
we’ll move into strategies to help you regulate your nervous system and regain
control of y our life.
CHAPTER THREE
REGULA TING YOUR NER VOUS
SYSTEM
Hopef ully, you’re starting to understand that the trauma-r elated symptoms
you’re experiencing are normal, adaptiv e responses to events that overwhelmed
your ability to cope at the time of the trauma and that these responses are
involuntary and unconscious. In other words, you are not to blame for the way
your body and mind have chosen to help you surviv e and through learning about
these processe s, you’ll be more able to change the way your body and mind
respond in the f uture.
Before we turn our focus to skills to help you manage these responses and
emotions more effectively, there’s one more idea that will be helpful for you to
learn: Polyvagal Theory . If you didn’t relate to the SDP model from the last
chapter , this theory will help you make sense of your trauma-r elated experiences
by increasing your understan ding of the nervous system and the role it plays
when we face extreme stress and trauma. If you did relate to the SDP model,
this chapter wi ll also f urther y our understanding of how parts dev elop.
What Is Polyvagal Theory?
In 1994, Dr. Steven Porges introduced Polyvagal Theory to the world. This theory
has become popular in helping us understand the role of our nervous system in
emotion regula tion, social connection, and the fear respon se. I’ll start by defining
some terms you’ll need to know for our discussion of trauma; remember to check
out the Further Reading section at the end of this workbook if you’re interested in
learning mor e.
Unconscious Perception: Neuroception
Neuroception  is the term coined by Dr. Porges to refer to the uncons cious
process of our nervous system constantly (six times per second!) scanning for
threats. This involves assess ment of internal (such as thoughts, emotions, and
physical sensa tions) and external (what ’s happening in our environment) cues,
as wel l as what ’s happening between us and the people ar ound us.
Here’s an example: One night, I was driving on a quiet back road when
suddenly I felt that I needed to brake. I slowed down, and a moment later, a
deer jumped into the road in front of me, missing me by milliseconds. No, I’m
not psychic!—clearly , I had unconsciously perceived something that put me on
alert for danger , causing me to slow the car. This is neuroception. You might
recall a situation when something similar has happened to you: perhaps a “first
impression” of someone that was later confirmed (“Thank goodness I didn’t go
out with them for that drink! ”) or a job you turned down because it “didn’ t feel
right.” Of course, sometimes we get it wrong—ma ybe you realize later that job
would’v e been a perf ect fit for you!
If our system neurocepts cues of safety, we’ll feel calm and be more able to
engage with others. If we’re picking up cues of danger , on the other hand, our
system will prepare us for defensive action. From this perspectiv e, we could say
that anxiety is the result of an overly sensitive system that neurocepts things as
threatening when they ’re really not.
Let’s look more closely at the autonomic nervous system and how what we
neurocept leads to automatic r esponses in our body .
The Autonomic Nervous System
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) involves various organs from our brain to
our colon, with the vagus nerve linking them all together. When the ANS
neurocepts a threat, it activates one of the defense responses you learned about
in the last chapter: fight, flight, freeze, submi t, or cry for help. Our ANS acts
outside of our conscious awareness —we don’t get to choose which defense
mechanism is activated. This is important to be aware of as people often beat
themselv es up for how they responded in a traumatic or stressful situation. But
I’m getting a little ahead of myself. Let’s first get to know our ANS a little better
from a polyv agal perspectiv e.
Three Pathways of the Autonomic Nervous
System
There are two branches of the ANS: the sympathetic nervous system (SNS),
which is also referred to as the “fight -or-flight” system, and the parasympathetic
nervous system (PNS), also known as the “rest and digest ” system. According to
Polyvagal Theory, the PNS is split into two pathways that travel within the vagus
nerve: the dorsal vagal and ventral vagal—hence the name, Polyvagal Theory . The
following Polyvagal Theory Chart of Trauma Response (Walker 2018) can help you
understand these three zones, what each response entails physiological ly, and
how they help us surviv e (you can also see this chart in full color here:
http://www .newharbinger .com/53103). This chart also illustrates how we move up
the polyvagal ladder (Dana 2023) as we become more emotional ly aroused and
how we move back down the ladder as our system detec ts that we are safe and
arousal decreases. In the color chart provided online, you’ll see that ventral vagal
is represented in green; sympathetic arousal is yellow; and dorsal vagal is red.
Just like the colors of a stoplight, green means go—all clear, it’s safe to proceed;
yellow means caution—be on the lookout for danger; and red means STOP, there’s
danger (in PVT terms, l ife threat).

When the ventral vagal PNS pathway is activated, we feel safe, calm, and
connected and we’re able to engage with others. If our ANS interpr ets cues in
our environment as threatening, our SNS kicks in, mobilizing us to act—by
fighting, fleein g, or freezing. Once we’ve acted and our ANS neurocepts us as
safe once again, we return to that ventral vagal state. But if we’re in SNS arousal
(fight, flight, or freeze mode) and our ANS detects that we’re trapped and
unable to escape, our dorsal vagal pathway will become activated, causing us to
shut down to surviv e. In this state, we submi t or collapse (which is why this is
also known as “flop and drop”) as our system tries to protect us from, or prepare
us for, death (think of a wi ldebeest that ’s been br ought down b y a lion).
In the following  section, we’ll look at each of these states one by one before
we look at an example and then have you consider what each of these looks like
for you.
Ventral Vagal: Safe and Socially Engaged
When we’re in this state, our heart rate is regulated and we can take in the
faces of friends and family and focus on conversations  without being overly
distracted by noise around us. We’re able to be curious , open, and interested
and to feel connected to our experience and the people around us. For simplicity,
I’m going to use Dana’ s (2018) language and call this the green zone— we
experience ourselv es as saf e.
Sympathetic Arousal: Fight, Flight, or
Freeze
When our system neurocept s a threat, our SNS activates, preparing our
body to fight, flee, or freeze: our heart rate increases; we feel the rush of
adrenaline as agitation or heat in the body; we feel anxious, nervous, or angry;
and the world feels threatening, frightening, or chaotic . If we’re in our SNS
regularly , we might experience ongoing anxiet y and even panic attacks, anger ,
irritability; difficulties following thr ough on things; and pr oblems in r elationships.
This is the yellow zone: when we need to use cautio n to protect ourselv es
from thr eat.
Dorsal Vagal Shutdown: Flop and Drop
If our SNS has been activated (we’re in yellow) and our ANS continues to
sense a threat we’re unable to escape, our dorsal vagus becomes activated. This
is the system of last resort: when all else fails, our system tries to help us
surviv e by collapsing or feigning death. Think of a possum playing dead; this is
different from a sympathetic  freeze, which involves energy—simi lar to a deer
frozen in headl ights, with tension in the muscles. In this shutdown state, opioids
are released to numb us to any pain that might accompan y the threat we’re
facing, and as a result, this is where we may become dissociated from our
experience. When our system frequently goes into this collapsed mode,
problems of daily living can include depression, dissociation, fatigue, and
difficulties wi th memory .
This is the red zone: when ther e is life threat.
I’ll just mention that there is some overlap of these states at times: for
example, I enjo y stand-up paddleboar ding. When I’m out on the lak e, I’m happ y,
at peace, and feeling calm and connected to the universe (green zone), but
there’s also some stress in my system. My muscles are tense to help me stay
balanced on the board, my heart rate and blood pressure are slightly elevated as
I stay alert for danger ous boaters, and I’m working to paddle (yellow zone). We
can therefore think of this as being in a blended state, or at the edges of these
two systems. For simplicity, howev er, I’ll stick to a more black-and-white
conceptual ization of these states.
A healthy ANS responds relatively accurately to cues of safety and danger ,
rather than regularly neurocepting cues as danger ous when they’re not, and can
move flexibly between these states, r ather than r emaining stuck.
What This Means If You Have Trauma
Let’s put this into context by returning to Marguerite and our discussion of parts
from the last chapter . Marguerite comes home from school; her brother has
soccer after school, so she feels safe. She’s in her bedroom doing homework,
feeling calm after a good day at school with her friends—she’ s in her green zone.
Suddenly , Marguerite hears the front door close. Her ANS automatical ly (and
unconsciously!) moves her into yellow so she’s ready to act if needed. She calls
out, asking who’s there, and when she hears her grandm other call up to her, she
breathes a sigh of relief—Grandma is supportiv e and loving— and Marguerite
moves back down into her green zone, anticipating warmth and affection from
her.
Here’s another version of this story: Marguerite comes home from school, is
in her green zone as she does homework, and her system moves into yellow
when she hears the door close. She calls out and when she gets no response,
she knows it’s her brother and they’re home alone together . Marguerite moves
further up the ladder in the yellow zone: she leaps up and locks her bedroom
door (trying to flee). Unfortunately , that won’t keep him out long and Marguerite
frantical ly looks around, assessing her options. As she hears her brother working
the lock, Marguerite’s system moves into her red, shutting her down as her ANS
neurocepts that there’s no escape. By the time her brother gets into the room,
she’s already dissociating (which we can also see as Marguerite’s submi t part
taking o ver to pr otect her).
When you’ve experienced trauma—pr olonged and repetitive, or single-ev ent
—your system can become overly sensitive, neurocepting cues as danger ous
when they’re not (remember , “sense of threat” is one of the clusters of
symptoms of PTSD). So, fifteen years later, Marguerite’s system doesn’ t respond
accurately to cues and continues to move her into the yellow zone—she has
anxiet y, panic attacks, and flashbacks— and into the red zone—causing
dissociation, depression, chronic fatigue, and problems with memory even
though she’s no longer living in that abusiv e environment. Marguerite’s system
has been trained to be overly sensitive (a.k.a.: her parts become activated) to
help her surviv e.
The following exercise will have you consider what each of these states
looks like for you and how you can start helping your system move more fluidly
from red to y ellow to gr een.
Activity: Getting to Know Your Zones
The first step in helping your system become more flexible  (for instance, being able
to come back to the green zone if you know you’re not actual ly in danger but find
yoursel f stuck in yellow or red) is to become aware of what zone you’re in. To help
with this, in the following activity (based on Dana 2023), you’ll make some notes
describing y oursel f when y ou’re in each z one. I’v e given you some wor ds commonly
used to describe these states to help .
How y ou feel in gr een (e.g. , safe, calm, at peace, connected, engaged, mindf ul,
curious, open, compassionate, gr ounded):
How y ou feel in y ellow (e.g. , unsaf e, on guar d, worried, af raid, panicky , frustrated,
irritated, angry , agitated, r estless):

How y ou feel in r ed (e.g. , threatened, helpless, hopeless, depr essed, ashamed,
numb , disconnected, detached, tr apped):
Now that you have a better understanding of what these states feel like for
you, let’s look at how you behave in each state. Again, I’ve started you off with
some examples.
What y ou do in gr een (e.g. , connecting wi th others, f ocusing, laughing, pla ying,
taking car e of sel f, being pr oductiv e):
What y ou do in y ellow (e.g. , checking, ha ving di fficulties si tting sti ll, arguing or
fighting, acting aggr essively, impulsiv ely, or recklessly):
What y ou do in r ed (e.g. , dissociating, numbing, a voiding, escaping, sleeping, using
substances, shut ting down, engaging in sel f-harming or suicidal beha viors):

Next, let’s look at your triggers for each of these states. What typical ly causes
you to be in your green, yellow, and red zones? Here, I’ve given you some
examples f rom Mar guerite’s story .
Times when y ou’re in gr een (e.g. , spending time wi th friends or m y dog; hiking in
the forest; ka yaking; standing outside on a quiet night, looking at the stars or
watching the fir eflies):
Times when y ou’re in y ellow (e.g. , being cut of f in tr affic; w alking alone in the
dark; unexpectedly hearing a loud noise; ha ving to do something outside m y
comfort zone like publ ic speaking):
Times when y ou’re in red (e.g. , seeing m y family; hearing m y brother’s voice;
interacting wi th aggr essive people; hearing someone outside m y apartment):

I mentioned that a healthy system moves flexibly between these states, but
after experiencing trauma, it’s common for the system to remain prepared for
danger . In individuals with CPTSD, ANS reactions are often heightened and
prolonged because those responses were needed so often during the trauma.
So, to protect these individu als, the ANS learned to live in the yellow zone (to
detect danger early on) or in the red zone (to avoid or escape from what was
happening). The ANS is trained to maintain these responses and will continue to
respond this way even when the trauma is over. So, what do you do? How can
you train your system out of these responses if they’re no longer serving you or
probably ev en hindering y ou?
In the last part of the activity you just completed (“times when you’re in
green”), you identi fied some  things you can do to get yoursel f back into your
green z one. Let ’s look at other ideas f or get ting y ou into gr een.
Getting Back to Green
I menti oned earlier the polyvagal ladder and that we move through these three
states in order: we first move through the yellow zone to get to red and, if we’re
in the red zone, we have to come back down to yellow before we can get to
green. In this section, we’re going to look at activities you can do if you find
yoursel f in the yellow or red zones, to help you return to green; then we’ll look at
ways of stimulating your vagus nerve to improve the overall flexibi lity of your
system.
Moving from Red to Yellow
Let’s say your ANS neurocepted something as a life threat, you quickly
moved through yellow and you’re in that flop and drop state, immobi lized, and
collapsed, and your system has given up—you’re in red. The key here is to get
you unfrozen, unstuck, and mobilized by bringing energy back to your body. How
can you do that? This will be different for everyone (and may even be different
for you in di fferent si tuations), so her e are some things to try:
Grounding ex ercises: These ar e exercises that help y ou get back into y our
body.
Stomp y our feet on the floor or clap y our hands: notice the
sounds and sensations in y our body as y ou do this.
This is a pr actice dev eloped b y Bodynamic I nternational: As y ou
inhale deeply , press your big toes into the floor . As y ou exhale
even mor e deeply , press your little toes into the floor (do this
several times).
Look ar ound and sa y out loud to y oursel f, “I see the… ” and name
three things y ou see. Then mo ve on to thr ee things y ou feel,
three things y ou hear , and thr ee things y ou smel l.
Smell a favorite perf ume, an essential oi l, or whatev er else y ou
have available (i t’s a good idea to consider this bef ore you need i t
to be sur e the scent y ou choose isn’ t triggering).
Dance, str etch, w alk, or pla y.
Do some intense ex ercise: run up and down the stairs in y our house or
apartment bui lding, run ar ound the block, or do jumping jacks.
If you ha ve a furry f riend, pet them, f ocusing on the softness of their f ur.
Add other ideas y ou know work f or you, or that y ou’re willing to try , here:

Moving from Yellow to Green
According to Dana (2018), it takes twent y minutes to move back into the
green zone when we’ve been in full sympathetic activation (yellow). Whether
you’ve started in yellow, or you’ve made your way back to yellow from red, you
still need to use ski lls to get y ou back to gr een. Her e are some ideas:
Forward bend (V an Dijk 2022): bend o ver as though y ou’re trying to touch
your toes. When we’r e in a posi tion wi th our head below our heart, our
PNS becomes activ ated, helping us mo ve out of sympathetic ar ousal.
Some people r oll their ey es when we talk about the importance of
breathing ex ercises, but y ou can’ t dispute the science and we know that
making y our exhale longer than y our inhale also activ ates the PNS—this is
the DB T skill of paced br eathing (Linehan 2014). T o do this, count (in y our
head) as y ou inhale. If y ou get to f our as y ou inhale, mak e sure you exhale
at least to fiv e. You’ll usual ly find that y our br eath wi ll natur ally slow as y ou
do this, which has a f urther calming ef fect. F or a double whamm y to the
PNS, you can also combine this wi th a f orward bend.
Vocalize: the v agus nerv e is connected to our v ocal cor ds, so singing,
humming, chanting, or gar gling can also help y ou come back down to y our
green z one.
Add other ideas y ou know work f or you, or that y ou’re willing to try , here:

A Note About Panic Attacks
Many people who have CPTSD experience panic attacks If this is you, here’ s
some helpful information.
What Is  a Panic Attack?
Panic attacks can be scary: Your ANS neurocepts something in the
environment as dangerous, catapulting you into sympathetic arousal (big-time
yellow zone!), causing all sorts of physical sensations: your breathing is out of
control, your blood pressure goes through the roof, you might experience
chest pains, dizziness, lightheadedness, nausea, narrowing of your vision…
These episodes can be so frightening, you might believe you’re going to die,
pass out, or “go crazy .” Rest assured: you’re not dying, you’re not going crazy ,
and you’re more than likely not going to pass out (although it’ s certainly okay
to sit down just in case, especially if you’ve fainted before).
While there are often triggers for panic attacks that can be addressed to help
reduce them, and you can learn other skills to manage them more ef fectively ,
many people don’t realize that the way you breathe is also typically a
contributing factor .
Subtle Hyperventilation
While this will depend on dif ferent factors, a healthy adult should be inhaling
twelve to twenty breaths per minute; if you’re inhaling more than this, you’re
hyperventilating. Hyperventilation  occurs when you have too much oxygen in
your lungs. Symptoms of hyperventilation include dizziness, lightheadedness,
shortness of breath, chest pain, rapid heartbeat, numbness or tingling around
the mouth or in the hands and arms, dry mouth, and “the little black fuzzies” or
other vision changes. While hyperventilation is often brought on by anxiety , the
symptoms of over-breathing often increase anxiety , leading to more
hyperventilation, and so on.
What to Do About It
People often tell me they try to “deep breathe” when they’re having a panic
attack. If you’re hyperventilating, chances are you’re making things worse for
yourself by breathing deeply because you’re maintaining excess oxygen in
your system. So, instead of deep  breathing, breathe as normally as possible
while covering your nose and mouth. You may have seen people in movies
use a paper bag when they’re hyperventilating. You can do that if you’d like,
but it’ s not necessary—you can use your hands, a cloth, or a towel (face
masks will work too!). The key is to cover your nose and mouth so you’re
breathing recycled air , which contains less oxygen. When you’re breathing as
normally as possible, those symptoms should begin to subside after a few
moments.
The key to keeping hyperventilation at bay in the long run, however , is deep
breathing—you need to train your body to inhale, slowly and deeply , twelve to
twenty times per minute.
*If you experience chest pains, please be sure to speak with your doctor .
The key when we’re in red is to increase arousal to get out of that shutdown
state. When we’re in yellow, we want to reduce arousal to return to calm. You
can, of course,  try all the activities I’ve mentioned to help you get back to your
green zone regardless of what zone you’re starting from. The idea here is for
you to have as many option s as possible to help you get back to green; you’ll
also see more ideas to help with this in the second part of this book. Before we
move on, let’s look at a few more activities that can help you get to and stay in
your gr een z one.
Coregulation
As human beings, we’re programmed to seek connection with others, but it’s
important for us to be aware that the people we surround ourselv es with influence
our nervous system. Coregulating  in Polyvagal Theory refers to the idea that our
ANS sends cues of safety or danger to the people around us, just as others’
systems affect our own. When we’re with someone calm, their ANS will help us
join them in the green zone (and, of course, this works both ways: when
someone else is dysregulated  and we can be a calm presence with them, our ANS
will help them come back to green). And keep in mind that all mammals have
nervous systems, so y ou can also cor egulate wi th your dog or cat!
Who do y ou ha ve in y our life that ’s typical ly a soothing pr esence and helps y ou get
back to y our gr een z one? Mak e some notes her e about how y ou cor egulate alr eady,
and what y ou can do to pr actice this:

Stimulating Your Vagus Nerve
Let’s finish off by looking at some gener al ways of exercising your green muscles.
Remember that Polyvagal Theory has only been around since the 1990s, so we
don’t have a lot of resear ch yet on the connection between the vagus nerve and
ways of str engthening i t, but her e are some things y ou can try .
Mindfulness Meditation
You’ll be learning more about mindf ulness in chapter five, but I’ll mention
here that mindfulness can increase heart rate variabi lity, or HRV (Telles et al.
2005), which is one measur e of vagal tone (you might already be familiar with
HRV as many wearable “smart devices” nowadays measur e it). Gener ally, higher
HRV indicates a stronger vagus nerve. So, when you practice mindf ulness, you’re
working your vagus nerve and increasing your ability to move more flexibly
between z ones.
Exercise
Given how helpful and healthy we know exercise is, it shouldn’ t be
surprising that we do have resear ch showing that physical exercise stimulates
the vagus nerve (Bonaz et al. 2017). It doesn’ t have to be intense or length y
periods of exercise—i f you’re not exercising at all, start by taking slow, short
walks, or ev en doing some l ight str etching. Just mo ve your body .
Cold Water Immersion
If you’re on any kind of social media, you’ve likely seen videos of people
climbing into tubs of ice water or jumping into freezing cold lakes. While often
this is just for fun (or TikTok), there are also benefi ts to immersing yoursel f in
cold water—if you do it properly and safely! Resear ch shows that one benefi t of
cold water immersion is increased HRV, although there is still debate about how
cold the water should be and how long you should submerse yoursel f. If you’d
like to experim ent, in the last ten to twent y seconds of your shower , reduce the
temper ature of the water as low as you can tolerate. You can build your
tolerance from there (please check with your doctor first if you have any physical
health condi tions!).
Massage
Massage is another way to stimulate the vagus nerve. Mindf ul contact with
another person  is a way of coregulating (if the person giving the massage is also
regulated) and gener ates feel-good chemicals in the brain. If you don’t have
anyone to give you a massage, or if that’s just not comfortable for you, you can
also massage y our own muscles.
Wrapping Up
In this chapter , you’ve learned about the ANS and how it’s constantly scanning for
danger to keep you safe. You’ve also learned in this chapt er that having a healthy
ANS isn’t about being calm all the time; remember , our system is meant to help us
surviv e, so we don’t want it offline altogether! Instead, we want to have a flexible
and resilient system that’s able to accurately assess safety and danger and
respond to those cues appr opriately .
One of the most important lessons I hope you’ve learned  in this chapter is
that we don’t get to choose how our system responds—o ur ANS chooses for us
based on our chances of survival. When your system moves into yellow, it does
so because it detects a chanc e of escape, but when it neurocepts that there’s no
possibi lity of surviving by fighting, fleeing, or freezing, the ANS will move you
into red, where you can escape the pain differently—for instance, through
dissociation.
In the next chapter , we’re moving into part two of the book and we’ll start
to look at other means of surviv al you might be using that are likely doing you
more harm than good, and skills to help you start to move away from these
unheal thy ways of coping.
Part II
CHAPTER FOUR.
Distress T olerance Skills
You’ve learned a lot in part one of this book about the effects of trauma,
including its effects on the ANS, and dissociation. Remembering there are
reasonable (trauma-r elated!) explanations for these experiences can help reduce
your fear of them. But because the emotions and distressing sensations can be
so painful, frightening, and disruptiv e to daily life, it’s not uncommon for people
to turn to unhealthy behaviors to cope. This might help in the short term, but it
creates a vicious cycle as you come to rely on those unheal thy coping
mechanisms to a void certain experiences.
In this chapter , we’ll look at some of those unheal thy mean s of coping (what
we’ll call target behaviors) and the cycle of reinforceme nt that keeps you going
back to those behaviors even when you know they’re doing you more harm than
good. Then we’ ll look at heal thier w ays of managing distr ess.
Activity: The Development of Target Behaviors
As you’ve been learning, the consequences of trauma are many: painful emotions;
memories and flashbacks; negativ e beliefs about yoursel f; dissociation; distressing
physical sensations; and so on. Take a moment to consider how you’ve tried to
avoid or escap e from reminders of the trauma or distressing symptoms. Keep in
mind that many of these behaviors aren’t problematic in and of themselv es but can
become unhea lthy when used excessiv ely or to avoid. Following are some common
examples—put a check beside the ones you’ve used to cope in the last three
months:
Drinking alcohol or using drugs
Lashing out at others
Sleeping
Playing video games
Using social media
Gambling
Spending
Restricting food
Purging after eating (e.g., vomiting, using laxatives, overexercising)
Overeating
Self-harming
Thinking about or trying to kill yourself
Engaging in unsafe sexual practices (e.g., having unprotected sex with people
you don’t know)
Engaging in obsessive thinking or compulsive behaviors (e.g., cleaning,
handwashing, counting)
Ruminating (excessive worrying, dwelling, rehashing)
People pleasing
Working excessively
Add an y other beha viors y ou’ve used in pr oblematic w ays her e:
What w as it like for you to consider this? P erhaps y ou hadn’ t realized something
you wer e doing w as problematic. Ma ybe y ou’re still not sur e. Or y ou ma y already
be very aware of y our tar get beha viors. W rite your thoughts her e:
If you’re not sure if you’ve been engaging in any target behaviors, you
might want to ask someone you trust for their perspectiv e or consider feedback
you’ve already received from the people you care about. This might be difficult
for you to acknowledge, but the first step in making any change is facing reality
as it is.
You began learning about parts of self in chapter two, and as we’ll discuss
in chapter seven, target behaviors such as those I’ve just listed are often parts’
ways of protecting you. So, not only are these behaviors understandable but we
also need to acknowledge they’ve likely helped you surviv e at times. Once the
trauma is over, howev er, you need to find healthier ways of managing. Before we
look at how to do that, let’s first look at something else that will help you to
understand these beha viors: the cy cle of r einforcement.
The Cycle of Reinforcement
Once you’re more aware of your target behaviors, it’ll be helpful for you to
understand how these behaviors keep you stuck in a vicious pattern of avoidance.
I call this the cycle of reinforcement . Reinforcement is when something happens
after you’ve engaged in a behavior that makes it more likely you’ll engage in the
behavior again in the future. Positive reinforcement is when  something perceived
as rewarding happens after a behavior (for instance, winning Emplo yee of the
Month makes that emplo yee continue to work hard). Negativ e reinforcement  is
when something aversive (like a painful emotion, memory , thought, or physical
sensation) is removed as a result of the behavior. For example, you’re having
distressing thoughts and memories about a past trauma, so you throw yoursel f
into work to not think about i t, reducing y our anxiet y.
One of the problems with unheal thy coping mechanisms, howev er, is that
the relief is always tempor ary; at some point, you have to return to the
problematic behavior to get more relief. Essential ly, you train yoursel f to believe
you can’t tolerate the painful experiences. Does this sound familiar? Keep in
mind you may not have made a conscious choice to turn to these behaviors. You
may have learned unconsciou sly that thinking about suicide, for example, takes
your mind off memories of your past traumas, reducing your pain (negativ e
reinforcement). By the way, we can also see suicidal thinking as a part trying to
protect you from pain; in Polyvagal terms, your ANS moves you from yellow to
red when it neurocepts (perh aps inaccurately) that there is life threat you can’t
escape.
Let’s get you thinking about how this pattern might fit for you in the
following activi ty.
Activity: Identifying Your Cycle of
Reinforcement
Do your best to answer the following questions about your target behaviors (if
you’ve identi fied more than one, I’d suggest you consider these one at a time to
prevent yoursel f from becoming overwhelmed). If you find yoursel f struggl ing with
these questions, try to start becoming aware of your patterns and return to this
activity when y ou ha ve mor e information.
1. Which tar get beha vior ar e you going to addr ess (first)?
1. What do you know about when the urge to engage in this behavior arises? For
example, does it come up at a certain time of day or day of the week? Is it
related to certain people? Does it arise when you’re struggl ing with internal
triggers l ike memories or panic at tacks?
1. What does the behavior do for you? Here are some examples: drinking alcohol
before you talk to your ex-partner helps you stand up to them (positively
reinforcing); lashing out at others gives you a sense of control (positively
reinforcing) or keeps others from getting close to you (possibly negativ ely
reinforcing, i f this r educes anxiet y about others get ting close to y ou).
Learning healthy coping skills—which we’ll look at shortly —will help you
replace these unheal thy ways of coping. Now let’s help you decide if you want to
change this beha vior b y furthering y our understanding of i t.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
You might already have a thorough understanding of the consequences of this
target behavior, but I find that, while people are often familiar with the negativ e
consequences the behavior carries with it, they often haven’t thought about the
positives. In my experience, if a behavior doesn’ t benefi t us in some way, we
wouldn’ t still be doing it, so it can help to figure out what’s maintaining it. This is
where a cost-benefi t analysis based on the DBT Pros and Cons skill (Linehan
2014) can be helpful, having you identi fy the positive and negativ e consequences
of engaging in the behavior and the positive and negati ve consequences of not
engaging in it. Rating each pro and con from 0 (not important at all) to 5 (most
important) can help you feel the weight of each response , rather than relying on
how many responses are in each category to help you see your responses in a
more objective light. Let’s look at a cost-benefi t analysis completed on the target
behavior of “using work to a void.”
Benefits of Target Behavior: Using Work to Avoid
4/5—It helps me feel in control.
4/5—It reduces my anxiety .
5/5—Working hard makes me feel good about myself.
Total : 13
Costs of Target Behavior : Using Work to Avoid
5/5—It leads to exhaustion.
5/5—I don’t get to spend much time with my children.
5/5—It prevents me from creating healthy relationships with others.
2/5—I don’t get to do things I enjoy , like traveling.
Total : 17
Benefits of Healthy Coping: Not Using Work to Avoid
5/5—My relationships with my children would improve.
5/5—I’d have more time for romantic relationships and friendships.
4/5—I’ll have to learn to deal with my anxiety in healthier ways.
5/5—I’m no longer letting my past control me.
Total : 19
Costs of Healthy Coping: Not Using Work to Avoid
4/5—I’ll have to learn to deal with my anxiety in healthier ways.
2/5—My boss won’t like it!
4/5—I won’t have an excuse not to meet new people!
Total : 10
Notice that doing an analys is like this has you thinking  about the target
behavior from as many different angles as possible. It also has you score each
cost and benefi t so you can compar e the numerical value of stopping the
behavior v ersus not stopping, which often brings mor e clari ty.
As you can see in this example, the benefi ts of stopping the behavior
outweigh the costs. Most often, completing a cost-benefi t analysis helps you see
what the wisest course of action is; howev er, you may find there are times when
you can’t think of reasons to learn new ways of coping because your old,
unheal thy patterns are too difficult to give up. When this happens, one option is
to ask the people who care about you for help. They’ll likely be able to provide
additional r easons to work on r educing or el iminating the beha vior.
Now i t’s your turn to consider one of y our tar get beha viors in the blank cost -
benefi t analysis pr ovided.
Activity: Cost-Benefit Analysis
Benefits  of Target  Behavior :
 /5— 
 /5— 
 /5— 
 /5— 

 /5— 
 /5— 
Total: 
Costs  of Target  Behavior :
 /5— 
 /5— 
 /5— 
 /5— 
 /5— 
Total: 
Benefits  of Healthy  Coping : Not
 /5— 
 /5— 
 /5— 
 /5— 
 /5— 
Total: 
Costs  of Healthy  Coping : Not
 /5— 
 /5— 
 /5— 
 /5— 
 /5— 
Total: 
It’s usually most effective if you do your analysis over a few days to ensur e
you’re consider ing the costs and benefi ts of the behavior from your wise self (more
about how to get to this wise place in the next chapter!). Take your time, and when
you’re ready to start looking at other behaviors, you’ll be able to access this
handout onl ine.
Once you’ve decided on the target behaviors you’d like to change, you’ll
want to use the skills outlined in the rest of this chapter to help you not act on
urges when they arise. It’s often difficult to eliminate unheal thy behaviors,
especial ly if you’ve habitually turned to them to manage trauma-r elated
symptoms; rest assured, there are many techniques we’ll be looking at in this
chapter (and throughout the book) that will help you not act on those urges. To
start, we’ll look at some distress tolerance skills (Linehan  2014), which help us
learn to tolerate the distress we’re experiencing and resist the urge to avoid it
through pr oblematic beha viors.
Changing Your Body Chemistry
These skills have become some of my favorites because they’re so effective at
quickly regulat ing emotions; the hardest thing about them is to remember to use
them when emotions start to f eel out of contr ol.
Stick Your Face in Cold Water
In the last chapter, you learned about cold water immersio n to stimulate the
vagus nerve. This skill, known in DBT as “tipping the temper ature of your face
with cold water,” also uses cold water, but in a different way, and this skill comes
with a caution (Linehan 2014): If you have a heart condi tion, low blood
pressure, take beta blockers (a medication used to treat heart or blood pressure
problems), or have anorexia or bulimia, move on to the next skill as this one can
lead to a rapid decrease in your heart rate, causing you to faint. If this doesn’ t
apply to y ou, read on!
When emotion s start to intensi fy—or are already intense— go to the nearest
sink and fill it with cold water (you can also use a large bowl or a bucket if that’s
easier). Stick your face in the cold water for twent y to thirty seconds (if you
can’t hold your breath that long, come up for a breath and repeat if necessary).
The combinati on of cold water, tipping yoursel f over, and holding your breath
tricks the body into thinking it’s underw ater and activates the mammal ian dive
reflex. This is a reflex that all mammals have: when submer ged in water, our
body redirects blood flow from our extremities to our heart and brain and lowers
blood pr essure, helping to r egulate emotions—f ast!
If you can’t use cold water for whatev er reason, there are other options
(starting with the temper ature of the water, although  cold water is most
effective). The following skills involve ways to activate the PNS. Remember , this
is the “rest and digest ” system that helps us decrease arousal, so having more
ways to get ther e will be helpf ul.
Forward Bend
I introduced this skill in chapter three, but it’s so effective, it bears
mentioning again. Whenev er our body is in a position in which our head is below
our heart, our PNS is activated. So, bending over as though you’re trying to
touch your toes or sitting with your head between your knees (also for twent y to
thirty seconds if that’s tolerable) will help put the brakes on when emotions start
to intensi fy. This is a good option if you can’t use cold water; but to make it even
more effective, you could put an ice pack over your eyes and hold your breath—
a modified version of sticking your face in cold water (but if using cold, the same
caution appl ies as wi th the cold w ater ski ll).
Intense Exercise
Intense exercise boosts certain chemicals in the brain, reducing emotional
pain and improving our mood and ability to regulate emotions. So, if you’re
stressed out and emotions are beginning to overwhelm you, do some jumping
jacks or lunges, go for a run or brisk walk, or run up and down the stairs or
around the block. This is also a good skill if you’re in the red zone and need
strategies to incr ease y our ar ousal to get y ou out of that shutdown mode.
Suck on Lemons!
Not actually, unless you love lemons! But the point here is that we can also
activate the rest and digest PNS by gener ating saliva—so , yes, sucking on
lemons will do it. But so will other things: for example, if I think the words salt
and vinegar  or dill pickle , my mouth starts to water. Consider what does this for
you or go out and buy some tart candy to suck on.
Try each of these skills to see how they feel for you ahead of time, and then
do your best to use them when emotions start to intensi fy; they won’t solve the
problem, of course, but they will help reduce the intensi ty of emotions so you
can respond to uncomf ortable experiences in a heal thier, mor e adaptiv e way.
Your List
You may be using some of these skills (or other skills that change your
body’s chemistry) already. Make a list of any skills you’re using already, and the
ones y ou’re willing to try her e:

RESISTTing the Urge
Regulating your emotions is usually only the first step; to prevent yoursel f from
getting stuck in a loop where they start to intensi fy once more, you’ll often need
to figure out what to do next. Let’s look at these skills using the acronym RESIST T
(Van Dijk 2013):
R: Reframe
E: Engage in an activi ty
S: Do something f or someone else
I: Experience intense sensations
S: Shut i t out
T: Think neutr al thoughts
T: Take a br eak
R: Reframe
Learning to think about situations from a different perspectiv e can help
reduce emotion al pain. There are lots of ways to do this; here are some for you
to consider:
“Find the si lver lining”: This doesn’ t mean y ou tel l yoursel f to suck i t up
and get o ver it! It’s important to acknowledge the pain y ou’re in. B ut trying
to see something posi tive in the di fficult experience y ou’re facing can mak e
a situation mor e bear able. F or instance, one of m y clients w as making the
difficult decision to tak e a lea ve from her job . She didn’ t want to , but giv en
her ongoing mental heal th struggles, she knew she w asn’t managing work
well. Instead of f ocusing on this as a f ailure, she r eframed i t by considering
how she would spend her time of f: “It sucks that I ha ve to tak e a lea ve
from work, but m y full-time job now is r ecovering f rom m y eating disor der
and doing the tr auma work I need to do .”
In DBT, we ha ve another w ay of reframing cal led comparisons (Linehan
2014). Her e are some examples:
Compar e yoursel f to someone else who isn’ t coping as wel l as you
are. This doesn’ t mean judging them but shi fting y our perspectiv e
so you can see that, whi le things ar e difficult, they could also be
worse. F or example, “I’m unhapp y with my life right now , but I
know what I need to change to be heal thier; man y of m y friends
have no plans f or the f uture, so I guess I’m actual ly ahead of the
game. ”
Compar e yoursel f to a time in y our own l ife when y ou wer en’t
managing as wel l as you are now . Again, this is meant to shi ft
your perspectiv e, not to mak e you feel gui lty or shamef ul about
your past: f or instance, “I’m struggl ing right now , but this is the
longest I’v e been able to sta y at a job , so I’m making pr ogress.”
Think of a br oader si tuation in the world that y ou can use as a
comparison: “Things ar e difficult right now , but I l ive in a country
that is f ree from w ar; I ha ve stable housing and means of
supporting m yself; and I ha ve family and f riends on whom I can
rely.”
Howev er you reframe, it’s important to validate the pain you’re in before
shifting your perspectiv e (we’ll come back to this skill, known as self-validation,
in chapter six).
Of course, it’s not at all uncommon for human beings to catastr ophize, or
imagine the worst possible outcome, but it’s important to recogniz e that the way
you talk to yoursel f influences how you feel. Changing your negativ e thinking
about a situation often makes it more tolerable, increasing your chances of
getting through it without turning to a target behavior that might make the
situation worse . To change negativ e thinking, write some coping statements you
can say to yoursel f when you’re facing a difficult situation to help you manage in
healthier w ays. Her e are some examples:
I can bear this; I’ve done it before.
These  feelings are uncomf ortable , but I know I’m safe in this moment .
This pain is tempor ary; it feels awful, but I know I can get through it.
These  are just emotions —they will pass.
If you’re struggl ing to come up with your own statements, feel free to use
these examples if they resonate for you or consider what you might say to
someone you care about if they were struggl ing to help you think of things you
can sa y to y oursel f.
YOUR LIST
You may be using some of these skills (or other skills to reframe) already;
make a list of any skills you’re using already, and the ones you’re willing to try
here:
E: Engage in an Activity
Engaging in an activity is about distracting yoursel f so you don’t make the
situation worse in some way. While distracting is not meant to be used in the
long term as it can turn into avoidance, there are certainl y times when it can be
helpful. Gener ally, if you’re facing a problem that can be solved, and there’s
something you can do about it right now, solve the problem. If there’s nothing
you can do to solve the problem, or you can’t do anything about it right now,
you can distr act.
Think about what you do to get your mind off things already that don’t have
negativ e conse quences: Watch a favorite show? Talk to a friend? Cuddle with a
pet? Becoming aware of things you do already is a great starting point; you can
brainstorm about what else you can do to distract when you’re becoming
distressed. Her e’s a list of heal thy coping activi ties to get y ou started.
Healthy Coping List
Spend time wi th your pet: w alk, gr oom, pla y, or snuggle wi th them
Look at photogr aphs that bring up pleasur able memories
Write a poem or short story
Sing y our favorite song
Put on some upbeat music and dance
Go to a mo vie
Find a f un new ringtone f or your cel l
Watch onl ine videos of bab y animals
Make your favorite treat or meal
Watch y our favorite show
Go to the mal l or a park to people- watch
Update y our social media status
Do a r elaxation ex ercise
Experiment wi th different hairst yles
Treat yoursel f to (or DIY) a manicur e or pedicur e
Imagine y oursel f in your favorite place
Play a musical instrument
Learn how to cr ochet, kni t, or do something else new
Journal
Play a sport y ou enjo y or w atch i t on TV
Rearrange or or ganize a room in y our house
Do a puzzle
Sit outside in the sunshine
Go pla y pool or bi lliards
Fantasiz e about r etirement, finishing school, y our next v acation, or
something else y ou’re looking f orward to
Do some y oga, go f or a swim, go to the gym, or do some kind of ex ercise
Dress up
Go for a driv e
Watch a TED T alk
Play an onl ine game y ou enjo y
Go explor e (driving, w alking, hiking) an ar ea you’re not f amiliar wi th
Light some scented candles
Go to the z oo, a pet ting farm, or an aquarium
Go bowl ing
Plan or or ganize an ev ent
Make a plan to impr ove your heal th (for example, eating heal thier,
increasing ex ercise, taking medications as pr escribed, r educing substance
use)
Go to a museum or art gal lery
Go to a place of worship
Do a chor e or run an err and
Go to a gr eenhouse, an arbor etum, or a botanical gar den
Volunteer y our time
Walk bar efoot in the gr ass
Read funny things onl ine (like funny Autocorr ects!)
Look at the stars
Watch f unny YouTube videos
Connect wi th a f riend (but don’ t spend the whole time talking about the
situation y ou’re trying to distr act from!)
Listen to some upbeat music
Read a book or magazine
Do some r esear ch on something y ou find inter esting
Take a bubble bath
Make a list of:
countries y ou’d l ike to visi t
famous people (past or pr esent) y ou’d l ike to meet
sights y ou’d most l ike to see
three questions y ou’d ask someone y ou could bring back to l ife
Draw, paint, doodle, or do a cr aft you enjo y
Play a boar d game wi th someone
Google “w ays to distr act” or “pleasant activi ties” and add ideas to y our list!
YOUR LIST
You may be using some of these skills (or other skills to distract) already;
make a list of any skills you’re using already, and the ones you’re willing to try
here:
S: Do Something for Someone Else
Are there things you do already that have you focus on someone else to get
your mind off your own stuff? Read the following ideas to help you come up with
more:
Shovel your neighbor ’s snow , rake their lea ves, or cut their gr ass.
Bake some cookies and dr op them of f to a f riend.
Do some v olunteer work at a local animal shel ter or f ood bank.
Offer to tak e care of y our friend’ s children for a f ew hours.
Send someone a car d to let them know y ou’re thinking of them.
Of course, your choice of activities will depend on your current
circumstances: if you’re stuck in your yellow zone having panic attacks, or a
fearful part is running the show, it likely won’t be comfortable for you to take
care of your friend’s children; if you’re dissociating or you can’t focus because of
the panic, it might not even be safe. This is one reason it’s helpful to have many
options for skills: if now isn’t the right time to babysit your friend’ s children, no
problem— you’ve got lots of other ski lls to choose f rom.
YOUR LIST
You may be using some of these skills (or other skills involving doing
something for someone else) already; make a list of any skills you’re using
already, and the ones y ou’re willing to try her e:
I: Experience Intense Sensations
Another set of skills that are effective in getting us through difficult
situations without making things worse involves considering what’s soothing for
your senses. Keep in mind the more intensely you experience the sensation, the
more it will help get your mind off the urges and emotions. Here are some
examples:
SIGHT
Look at pictur es of people or pets you love; drive or walk to a place where
you can observ e nature; go to an art gallery; buy a bouquet of flowers or one
flower; or pick some wi ldflowers and put them somewher e you’ll see them often.
SOUND
Listen to soothing music; have someone you care about record a message
so you can hear their voice; listen to sounds of nature that are soothing for you,
like waves, rain, crick ets, or a thunderstorm.
TOUCH
Hug someone; put clean sheets on your bed and enjoy the feel as you slide
between them; si t by a fir e or in the sun and f eel the w armth of i t.
TASTE
Treat yoursel f to your favorite meal or snack; suck on a favorite flavored
candy; drink an herbal tea.
SMELL
Use some aromather apy (lavender , for example, is calming); put on a
favorite perfume, cologne, or body lotion; or stop and smell the roses! Keep in
mind that our memory for scent is the strongest of all our senses, so it’s a good
idea to choose  smells when you’re not in crisis so you can be sure the scents
you choose won’ t trigger y ou further .
YOUR LIST
You may be using some of these skills (or other skills to soothe your senses)
already; make a list of any skills you’re using already, and the ones you’re willing
to try her e:
By the way: self-soothing is good self-care, so unlike the other skills in this
section, I would encour age y ou to use these ski lls on a r egular basis!
S: Shut It Out
Another strategy we can use to get our mind off a distressing experience is
to “shut it out.” The idea here is not to avoid the experie nce but to tempor arily
set it aside to be consider ed or worked with later. Let me emphasiz e that what
we’re shutting out is the event itself, not emotions, and not parts! Let’s look at
some w ays to do this.
CREATE A CONTAINER
This is an imaginal exercise that has you creating a container in which to
place a distressing experienc e. Remember that this is meant to be tempor ary,
which means you put things into your container and you’re also able to take
them back out again. We also want it to be what I refer to as a neutral container
—in other words, it’s not a garbage bin but it also doesn’ t have to be an
extravagantly furnished room. Here are some examples:  a safe, filing cabinet,
magical pouch , closet, storage container , or chest. I encourage my clients to
create some kind of locking mechanism to provide an extra sense of control, but
do what f eels best f or you. What comes to mind as y ou read this?
Activity: Using Your Container
In this activity, you’ll practice  using your imaginal container , but if you struggle with
this, you can move on to the next section where I’ll provide suggestions for using a
concr ete container .
Closing y our ey es, en vision y our container .
Tip: If you struggle to visual ize, you can look at something r eal that y ou can base
your imaginal container on. Then, when I sa y “imagine” or “visual ize,” see i f you
can experience  or sense  your container r ather than seeing i t. Describe the
container in as much detai l as you can: What color is i t? How big is i t? Is it
textur ed? Does i t lock? Mak e some notes about y our container her e; you can also
give it a name (such as “The V ault”), or y ou can dr aw a pictur e of it:
Once you have a good sense of your container , think of a recent situation that
was uncomf ortable (perhaps irritating, or mildly anxiet y-provoking). It’s best not to
start with a high level of discomf ort, so aim for perhaps a 2 or 3 on a scale from 0
(no disturbance) to 10 (the highest disturbance you can imagine). See if you can
feel the emotion as you recall the situation. Now, envision or feel yoursel f placing
that experience into your container (for example, if you’re worrying about a
problem you had with your boss, you might put your boss into the container). Take
a moment to really get a sense of containing the problem . When you’re done, re-
rate the level of disturbance from 0 to 10; you’ll hopef ully find that it’s decreased.
As you get more comfortable  with your container , you’ll be able to use it with more
distressing experiences as wel l.
GET CONCRETE
You can also turn this into a more concr ete exercise by writing out a title for
the uncomf ortable experience on a piece of paper (to return to the example of
your boss, you might write your boss’s name or a description of the problem,
such as “No bonus at work this year”). Then put the paper into a physical
container (consider putting this somewher e you won’t constantly see it to help
you let go of the experience that ’s bothering y ou).
YOUR LIST
You may be using some of these skills (or other skills to shut it out) already;
make a list of any skills you’re using already, and the ones you’re willing to try
here:
T: Think Neutral Thoughts
If you’ve ever been given the advice, “count to ten when you’re feeling
angry ,” that’s what this skill is about. It’s difficult to contin ue feeling an emotion
while we’r e focusing on neutr al thoughts. Her e are some other examples:
Sing y our favorite song
Repeat a calming or soothing mantr a (such as I am safe or Come  back to
the present )
Count backw ard from 100 b y 3s
Look at a pictur e and name the objects y ou see
Go thr ough the alphabet and l ist an animal that starts wi th each let ter
YOUR LIST
You may be using some of these skills (or other skills to distract with neutral
thoughts) already; make a list of any skills you’re using already, and the ones
you’re willing to try her e:
T: Take a Break
Taking a break when emotions are intense and you’re noticing yoursel f
moving up the polyvagal ladder can help you get through a difficult time without
turning to target behaviors. Read the following examples and consider what this
might look l ike for you:
Go for a w alk or driv e to clear y our head and r educe f eelings of o verwhelm
Order tak eout instead of ha ving to cook and clean up
Take a da y off work and sta y in y our pajamas al l day watching mo vies
Find a last -minute v acation somewher e: book a cot tage, go camping, or go
stay with a f riend
Do a mindf ulness pr actice (we’ ll be looking at mindf ulness in the next
chapter , if this is new to y ou), a r elaxation ex ercise, some y oga, or
something else that helps y ou feel calmer or at peace, such as the calm
place (coming up next!)
Just be sure there are no long-term consequences if you’re taking a break—
it can’t interfere with your responsibi lities or long-term goals. Keep in mind that
breaks, used too often, can also turn into avoidance; they should be used
sparingly , but they can be in valuable.
Activity: Creating a Calm Place
Sometimes you can’t physical ly get away from a problema tic situation, but you can
create a place in your mind to help you feel calmer —this is the purpose of the calm
place (or healing place, peacef ul place—use whatev er words fit best for you). Take
a moment to think of a place that’s calming for you: this can be a place you’ve
been, like a favorite vacation spot or hiking trail or it can be a fictional place, like a
castle in the clouds (as with the container , if you struggle to visual ize, you can look
at a photogr aph or draw a picture of a place you’d like to be). Closing your eyes if
that’s comfortable, do your best to really feel the place as you visit it—notice any
sights, smells, sounds, and anything you feel physical ly or emotional ly while you’re
in your calm place.
Write the name of y our calm place her e:
Now, let’s practice. Recall a situation you encounter ed that was frustrating or
annoying— again on a scale from 0 (neutr al) to 10 (the most disturbance
imaginable), aim for about 2 or 3. Once you’ve brought the situation to mind and
the disturbance associated with it, bring to mind your calm place once more—recall
the name you gave it and everything associated with it, and do your best to
experience it in as much detail as possible. Notice if the disturbance you’re recalling
decreases as you experience the peacef ulness of that place. If it does, wonderf ul!
Be sure to use your calm place in times of distress to help you manage these
emotions. You might also use your container to put something disturbing away
before you go to your calm place. If you didn’t find your disturbance went down,
don’t worry—it’s not uncommon for people with CPTSD to struggle with shifting
from a painful to a calmer state; if that’s the case, you’ve learned something about
yoursel f and this is something y ou’ll need to pr actice.
YOUR LIST
You may be using some of these skills (or other skills to take a break)
already; make a list of any skills you’re using already, and the ones you’re willing
to try her e:

We all know how hard it can be to think straight when we get into crisis and
emotions start to get intense; having your list of distress tolerance skills takes
the thinking out of the equation, making you less likely to engage in a target
behavior. So, before you finish with this chapter , I’d suggest that you go back
through all the skills you’ve listed in each section—the ones you use already, and
the ones y ou’re willing to try —and wri te them down on a separ ate piece of paper
or put them in your phone. This is your list of distress tolerance skills that you’ll
want to have easy access to when things get difficult so you don’t have to think
about what you can do to get through the crisis— you can just pull out your list
and it’ll tell you what to do. You can add to this list as you continue to work your
way through this book and learn new ski lls to use when things get tough.
Wrapping Up
These skills are just the start, meant to replace target behaviors you’ve been
turning to and to help you manage intense emotions when they arise. In other
words, these skills are meant to help increase safety and stability so you’ll be able
to move on to stage two (trauma resolution)—i f you choose— which will result in
less need for distress tolerance skills over time, as the past will no longer be
present in y our dai ly life.
In the next chapter , we’ll begin looking at the skills that are meant to be
used on a more regular basis to help you manage emotions more effectively,
beginning wi th the ski ll of mindf ulness.
CHAPTER FIVE.
Mindfulness Skills
In the last chapter , we shifted our focus from learning about trauma to learning
skills to help you manage the fallout of trauma. As you learned in chapter one,
emotion dysregulation is one symptom of CPTSD, which is why we started with
these skills to help you manage emotions more effectively. If you recall,
howev er, distress tolerance skills aren’t meant to be your go-to in the long term
as that can easily turn into avoidance. This is where other DBT skills come in,
starting with mindf ulness, which is a core DBT skill and will be helpful in your
recovery from tr auma in man y ways.
In this chapter , you’ll learn what mindf ulness is and how it will be helpful.
Then we’ll return to look more closely at parts of self (introduced in chapter
two), wi th the help of a DB T skill known as states of mind .
Mindfulness: What It Is
You’re out for a walk on a sunny day, the flowers are blooming, but you’re feeling
angry as you dwell on a fight you had with your friend. Or you’re having a panic
attack as you’re stuck in the past reliving your trauma, or perhaps you’re not
feeling anything as you’re in a dissociativ e trance. These are examples of
mindlessness, when our attention is divided, we’re not fully in the present
moment (or, in the case of trance, we’re not at all in the present moment), and
we’re caught up in judgments of ourselv es, situations, or others.
Mindf ulness, in contrast, involves doing one thing at a time, in the present
moment, with our full attention, and with acceptance. When we’re being
mindf ul, we’ve taken ourselv es off automatic pilot, we’re engaged with what
we’re doing in this moment (our mind still wanders, but we notice that and come
back to the present), and we’re open, curious, and accepting of whatev er we’re
experiencing—both within ourselv es and in the world around us. Let’s look at
why you would w ant to do this bef ore we delv e into the how.
Mindfulness Increases Self-Awareness
When we’re being mindf ul, we’re living more in the present, so when emotions,
thoughts, physical sensations, and urges arise, we’ll be more aware of them
because we’re paying attention. And when we’re being mindf ul, we’re more
accepting of our experiences, meaning we’ll be less likely to avoid or ignore
unpleasant experiences. How is this helpf ul?
Awareness of Emotions
Quite often, trauma teaches people that emotions are not to be expressed
and are safer to be avoided. Consider a child who’s expressing frustration, crying
because they’re sad or anxiou s, or being playful, but their behavior is interpr eted
by an abusiv e parent as “bad” and in need of punishment —for this child,
expressing emotions can be downright danger ous. Pushing emotions away
becomes the safest course for the child, but as an adult, this (often unconscious)
avoidance is no longer helpful and actual ly causes more problems (for example,
they’re not able to express anger, so resentment builds and they blow up or they
end up taking i t out on themselv es thr ough sel f-harm or other means).
Being aware of our emotions  is important for many reasons: for instance,
psychiatrist Dan Siegel reminds us that, in order to tame emotions, we have to
be able to name them (2014). In other words, if we can’t recogniz e the emotion
we’re feeling, we won’t be as effective at taming it through skills such as
problem-solving or sel f-validation (a ski ll we’ll look at in the next chapter).
Are you able to accurately name your emotions? Or do you use vague
language like, “upset ” or “bad”? When asked how you feel, do you find yoursel f
describing thoughts instead (for example, “I feel like it’s not fair that we’re not
getting a bonus at work this year!”)? Make some notes  about your thoughts
here:

You’ll have the opportuni ty to consider this in chapter six, and if you find
this is an area where you struggle, I’ll have some tools to help. For now, know
that mindf ulness will help you accurately label your emotions as you become
more in tune wi th and ac cepting of these and the r elated internal experiences.
Awareness of Triggers
A trigger  is something in the present that reminds us (consciously or otherwise) of
an unresolved trauma. A trigger can take any form: it might be a person who
reminds us of someone associated with negativ e past experiences; it could be a
sensation (I learned through doing my own work that having water leak into my
mask while scuba diving was triggering an unconscious memory of a near-
drowning experience when I was a toddler —who knew?). A trigger could be a
song on the radio; a time of day (such as someone who becomes anxious at
night, when the sexual abuse they experienced as a child would take place); or a
time of year (like birthda ys or anniv ersaries). Smells are also common triggers,
such as the smell of the cologne a perpetr ator wore or the smell of cookies your
abusiv e mothe r used to bake. Triggers can be internal (things happening within
you, like physical sensatio ns, self-talk, and memories) or external (things
happening in your environment, such as the sound of someone walking down the
hallway in your house). You may not be aware of your triggers yet, but take a
moment to consider what y ou do know and mak e some notes her e:
In response to the trigger , you become trigger ed—up the polyvagal ladder
you go, and on come your defense systems— your parts become activated, and
you may find yoursel f reacting in ways similar to how you reacted during the
original trauma (and remember , even if you don’t have conscious recall for the
event, your body remembers). Janina Fisher notes that, “When we remember a
traumatic event, or when we are trigger ed by some small cue in the here and
now, our bodie s automatical ly begin to mobilize for dange r, not knowing that we
are rememberi ng threat rather than being threatened now” (Fisher 2017, 96).
This is because the amygdala—the part of the brain that responds to stress and
triggers our active defenses—isn’ t able to differentiate between past and
present, so we f eel as though the danger is happening now.
Flashbacks and dissociation are obvious signs of being trigger ed, but signs
can also be subtler , such as:
Feeling like you’re not in contr ol of y our reaction
Having a r eaction that seems mor e intense than what ’s warranted b y the
situation
Reacting di fferently f rom how y ou would usual ly react
Becoming stuck in y our reaction, unable to step back and ac cess y our
internal wisdom
Feeling as though y ou’re “not y oursel f,” as though another part of y ou has
taken over
Consider your experience of being trigger ed. This may not look the same
every time, but you may have noticed some patterns. Write what you know
here:
Of course, you may not have this information yet, but others may have
helpful observ ations for you about your triggers and what being trigger ed looks
like for you. If you don’t have anyone you can ask about this, or if it’s not
comfortable to do so, know that mindf ulness will help you develop this
awareness o ver time so y ou can come back to this section later .
Awareness of Early Warning Signs
It can also be helpful to know your early warning signs if you experience
dissociation and flashbacks. With practice, people are often able to pick up on
something that happens just before they start to dissociate or have a flashback —
changes in breathing; things becoming “fuzzy” or “foggy”; or feeling dizzy or
lightheaded. Being aware of your polyvagal zones will also be helpful: since
dissociation happens in the red zone, when you notice you’ve moved into yellow
(for example, your heart rate and respiration increase), you’ll know you’re heading
into dissociation terri tory if you don’ t use ski lls to get back to gr een.
Make some notes about what you know about your early warning signs of
dissociation or flashbacks, i f this appl ies to y ou:
Mindfulness Increases Pleasurable
Emotions
Approaching life mindf ully can have a calming effect on us—when we’re mindf ul,
we tend to be less overwhelmed by dividing our attentio n and multitasking and
we judge ourselv es less, which spares ourselv es painful emotions such as anger
and shame. In addition, mindf ulness helps us experience more pleasur e: it can be
easy to miss out on moments of calm or contentment because they’re often not
as intense as moments of pain. When we’re living in the present with acceptance
more often, we’ll be more in tune with those pleasur able feelings, even if they’re
not str ong or long-lasting.
People sometim es also become fearful of when the other shoe will drop, so
to speak: if they feel content, love, or happiness, for instance, they worry about
when that emotion will end. This is such a common experience that author
Brené Brown (2012) coined the term foreboding joy to describe it. Essential ly,
we chase away the pleasur able emotion by getting caught up in worrying about
when it will end. If instead we accept the emotion, notice when we start to
worry about the future, and bring ourselv es back to this moment, we’ll be more
able to enjo y the pleasur e.
Think about your own experience of pleasur able emotions and make some
notes her e about what y ou know:
Mindfulness Helps Us Not Act on Urges
By being more aware of triggers and internal experiences, you can increase your
awareness of urges (whic h consist of emotions, thoughts, and physical
sensations), allowing you the choice of acting on the urge or doing something
else. That isn’t to say that not acting on the urge is easy, but having awareness of
urges earlier on will give you more time to make healthier choices like using skills
instead.
This list is not exhaustiv e, but hopef ully, you’re starting to understand some
of the ways mindf ulness will be helpful. If we also put all these pieces together ,
hopef ully, you can see that mindf ulness will help you learn to observ e (rather
than react to) your experiences and to describe  those experiences
nonjudgmental ly: this is the basis of parts work, which we’ll be looking at in
chapter sev en.
Write your thoughts here about how you think mindf ulness might be helpful
for you:
Now, let’s look at how to pr actice.
Mindfulness: How to Do It
One common (mis)understan ding of mindf ulness is that it involves meditation.
While you can practice mindf ulness in this way (such as doing a body scan or
guided imagery), you don’t have to meditate to be mindf ul. Since meditating can
be very difficult, especial ly when you have a history of trauma, I’m going to start
by introducing what we refer to as informal mindf ulness, which entails living life
more mindfully. If you have prior experience with mindf ulness meditation (or
formal mindf ulness), I’d invite you to set aside what you know as best as you can
and pr etend y ou’re learning about mindf ulness f or the first time.
Four Steps to Mindfulness
When it comes to informal mindf ulness, there’s an infinite number of ways
to practice; y ou can use the f ollowing steps to guide y ou:
1. Choose the activi ty you’ll do mindf ully. For instance, y ou could r ead the
rest of this page mindf ully, pet y our dog or cat mindf ully, or ha ve a
conversation mindf ully.
2. Start f ocusing on the activi ty. Remember y ou’re doing one thing at a time,
so turn y our full attention to that one thing. If y ou’re reading this page
mindf ully, you’re just r eading: turn of f the television or the music y ou’re
listening to , stop pet ting y our dog or cat, and just r ead.
3. At some point, y ou’ll notice y our mind w ander …This is normal! The human
brain gener ates thousands of thoughts each da y, so it’s almost impossible
for your br ain to not wander . Step thr ee is noticing when this happens—
oh look, y ou’re no longer completely f ocused on the wor ds you’re reading
(“Yes, m y mind w anders al l the time, I’m bar ely ev er in the pr esent. How
am I ev er going to be able to do this… ” and of f you go!). Y es, this is
normal.
4. As best as y ou can, wi thout judging (y oursel f, others, distr actions in y our
environment, and so on), bring y our at tention back to the activi ty you’re
doing.
Then repeat steps three and four over and over again: Notice when you’ve
wander ed, do your best to not judge, and re-focus. And look, there you go
again…Notice it, accept, and come back. Don’t expect that you won’t wander —
the point of mindf ulness isn’t to stay focused but to notice when you’ve
wander ed and bring y oursel f back (wi thout judgment).
Now let ’s see what i t looks l ike to pr actice mindf ulness f ormal ly.
Formal Mindfulness Practice
Remember , it’s not essential that you practice mindf ulness formal ly, but
these exercises can be very helpful. I’ll provide a couple of exercises for you to
try throughout this book (refer to the Further Reading section if you’re looking
for more on this). With a trauma history , howev er, it’s important that you be
cautious with formal practices, especial ly if you tend to dissociate or have
flashbacks or intrusiv e thoug hts and memories. Keep practices short (no longer
than two minutes to start). Using a timer is a good idea—i f you dissociate or
have a flashback, the sound  of the timer will help bring you back. It’s also
important to keep your eyes open, as you’re much more vulner able to
dissociation and flashbacks with eyes closed. Just be sure to find a place to rest
your ey es during the pr actice that won’ t be distr acting f or you.
Let’s start with a breathing practice you can do mindf ully that will also help
regulate emotions b y activ ating y our PNS: P aced B reathing.
Activity: Mindfulness with Paced Breathing
This is the skill I introduced in chapter three to help you move from yellow to
green, activating your PNS through making your exhale longer than your inhale;
let’s look at how to turn this into a mindf ulness pr actice b y using the f our steps:
1. Choose your focus. I’ve chosen for us—paced breathing. (Here’s your reminder
to set y our timer f or two minutes).
2. Start to focus on breathing: inhale, count; exhale, count, and make the exhale
longer than your inhale (so if you inhale to four, make sure you exhale at least
to five, for instance).
3. Notice when y our at tention w anders.
4. Gently , without judging, bring y our at tention back to y our br eath.
Continue to notice when your mind wanders and bring yoursel f back without
judging. Wander ed again? Yep, you’re human— accept it and come back to just
counting and br eathing, unti l the timer goes of f.
When y ou’ve finished, consider what this ex ercise w as like for you. Stick to
descriptiv e language, r ather than judgments: What did y ou notice? An y urges—to
move around, stop the pr actice, or an ything else? Did y ou act on the ur ges, or
were you able to just si t with them, r eturning y our at tention to y our br eath? Did
you struggle to sta y focused? Mak e some notes her e:
If you dissociated or had flashbacks, intrusiv e though ts, memories, or
images and you had your eyes open during the practice, please don’t be
discour aged; remember , formal mindf ulness can be espec ially difficult when you
have a history of trauma. There are various changes you can make to your
practice (such as doing some thing that doesn’ t focus on your body or breath and
making the practice shorter), but I would suggest you stick to informal practices
for now while you use some of the skills you’re learning to help you stay
grounded. R emember , the goal right now is stabi lity.
In the next section, you’ll learn about a DBT skill known as states of mind,
which wi ll give you another option f or being mindf ul.
States of Mind
In DBT, we believe everyone has three states of mind (Linehan 2014) , or different
ways of thinking and being in the world: reasoning mind, emotion mind, and wise
mind. I’ve also come to think of these three states as different parts of the self.
Let’s look at each of these states and learn more about how to access our internal
wisdom.
Reasoning Mind
Reasoning mind is the part of us we access when we’re using our logical,
straightf orward, matter-of-fact thinking about something . There’s no emotion
involved in this state: we’re focused on just the facts; if there is emotion, it’s
minimal and isn’t influencing  our behavior. For example, when I’m making a
grocery list, I’m looking through the cupboar ds and fridge, writing down the
things I need; for me, there’s no emotion involved in this (if you have strong
emotions, such as anxiet y about food and eating, this likely won’t be a reasoning
mind experience for you—k eep in mind that these states will be different for
everyone).
Of course, there are times when it’s handy to be in our reasoning mind— I
don’t need emotions getting in the way when I’m making my grocery list. The
goal isn’t to get rid of this part of ourselv es (or any part!) but to be aware of
when we’re acting from our reasoning, and to be able to get to another state if
we recogniz e that would be helpf ul.
Think of some times y ou’re in reasoning mind and wri te them her e:

Emotion Mind
When we’re in emotion mind, we’re not just feeling an emotion— we’re
being controlled by it: for example, avoiding whatev er is causing your anxiet y or
lashing out at people in anger . It’s important to recogniz e that we can also be in
emotion mind with pleasur able emotions, like when you get exciting news and
you call your friends and family to share it or you post on social media. So, of
course, we don’t want to get rid of this state either; even when emotions are
painful, emotion mind helps us connect and empathiz e with others when they’re
in pain, so we need this state. Again, what’s important is that we’re able to
recogniz e when we’re in emotion mind and do something to get ourselv es to a
more balanced state when we w ant to or need to .
Think of some times y ou’re in emotion mind and wri te them her e:
Recall our discussion of parts from chapter two: many people with a trauma
history have developed a personal ity that has fragmented into one (or more, in
DID) normal life part—the part that does what needs to be done, is rational and
grounded, and avoids reminders of the trauma— and one or more trauma  parts—
the parts that hold information related to the trauma and the fear that it will
happen again. You can probably easily recogniz e emotion mind as trauma parts:
these are the parts that are related to our defense systems, so they’re angry
(fight), afraid (flight and freeze), ashamed (submi t), and desper ate for
connection (cry for help). Reasoning mind will also sometimes be related to
trauma parts as we avoid or try to ignore emotions out of fear, shame, and so
on.
The normal life part is also not integr ated, but this part might not be quite
as easy to categoriz e as emotion mind or reasoning mind. I’d suggest that this
part might fall into either category , depending on the situation, and probably
also dependin g on your temper ament: some people tend to “default” to
reasoning mind, and others default to emotion mind. The goal, though, is to
have access to your reasonin g, your emotions, and all trauma-r elated material,
allowing you to make healthy choices, rather than being driven by fragmented
parts of y our sel f. This is wher e wise mind comes in.
Wise Mind
You’ve heard me mention this state of mind throughout this book. When we’re in
wise mind, we draw on our logic or reasoning without being controlled by it, we
feel our emotions without being taken over by them, and we take into
consider ation our intuition (which includes past learning experiences, knowledge,
and values). Putting these together, we get to a place of knowing , deep down and
with our entir e being, what the wise thing is in this moment.
Let’s look at Lincoln’ s story to help deepen your understanding of these
states.
Lincoln’s Story
As a chi ld, Lincoln alw ays but ted heads wi th his par ents: they sa w him as
a troublemak er, a bad student who struggled to pass his classes, and
who w as nev er able to meet their expectations. He w as bul lied in school,
but his par ents told him i t was his own f ault for not doing mor e to fi t in
with the other kids. Mor e than once, his f ather told him he needed to
“stop being so emotional. ” At the age of f ourteen, Lincoln r an away
several times and w as fighting wi th his par ents so much that they
eventual ly had him put into f oster car e.
Now, Lincoln is f orty-two y ears old and he’ s realized that his f ear of
abandonment (an at tach part) driv es him to do whatev er he can to get
people to l ike him and not lea ve. This includes ignoring emotions such as
resentment when he continuously giv es and r eceives nothing in r eturn—
his logic tel ls him that, i f you ask f or too much or become too needy ,
people wi ll leave you (reasoning mind/tr auma parts). Mor e than once,
he’s made up stories about his heal th so people wi ll spend mor e time
with him (emotion mind/tr auma parts).
Wise mind would ha ve Lincoln be a ware and ac cepting of his
emotions and beha viors (they mak e sense giv en the f act that his par ents
abandoned him as a chi ld) and working to mak e heal thy changes using
skills. The k ey her e is that Lincoln isn’ t allowing just his r easoning or his
emotions to run the show but finds a balance between these two and
brings in his intui tion—this is his balanced, integr ated, wise mind.
When you’ve experienced complex trauma, wise mind can be difficult to
access. But trust me when I say it is there within you! Let’s look at some skills to
help you get there, starting with some concr ete lifestyle changes you might
choose to mak e.
Increasing Access to Wise Mind: STRONGR
There are things we all do at times that reduce our ability to access our wise
mind; let’s look at how to improve your ability to reach that more balanced
perspectiv e with the acr onym STRONGR (based on V an Dijk 2022):
Sleep (the right amount f or you)
Treat ph ysical and emotional heal th problems
Resist using drugs and alcohol
One thing each da y to bui ld mastery
Nutrition (balance i t)
Get exercise
Reduce scr een time
Sleep
The average adult requires seven to nine hours of sleep each night, but
we’re all different, and you need to figure out what works  best for you. If you’re
not already aware of how much sleep you need to function ideally, the best way
to figure this out is to pay attention to things like how rested you feel upon
waking, what your energy level is like, and if you’re struggl ing with cogni tive
abilities, like concentr ation and memory . If you’re sleeping too much or are
regularly sleep-depriv ed, it will be mor e difficult to ac cess y our wise mind.
Treat Physical and Emotional Health
Problems
As you learned  in chapter two (remember ACEs?), there are good reasons
trauma surviv ors experience more health problems than those who don’t have
this history . Since we can’t disconnect the body from the mind, it’s important to
take care of physical health to manage mental health more effectively, whether a
chronic condi tion, like diabetes or fibromyalgia, or an acute illness, like a cold.
Physical health problems can make it more difficult to access wise mind, so
following your healthcare providers’ treatment recomme ndations is important.
Treating mental health problems might include taking medications as prescribed
(or using complementary and alternativ e medicine if that’s your preference),
seeing a psychother apist, surrounding yoursel f with supportiv e people, or
reading books l ike this one!
Resist Using Drugs and Alcohol
We’ve already discussed that trauma puts people at risk for substance
misuse; substa nces can also make it more difficult to access your wise mind
(and not just at the time of use, but potential ly for days after). If you find
yoursel f turning  to drugs or alcohol to help you feel better (for example, to avoid
emotions, or to help y ou relax or “un wind”), this ma y be a pr oblem.
One Thing Each Day to Build Mastery
Building mastery (Linehan 2014) means doing something that gives you a
sense of fulfillment, accompl ishment, or pride for what you’ve done. Doing at
least one thing daily that builds mastery helps you access your wise mind and in
the long run contributes to an increase in self-respect and self-esteem. This will
look different for everyone, so consider what you do already that gives you a
sense of fulfillment or accompl ishment, and what more you could be doing.
Examples include going to work, pushing yoursel f to get out of the house, doing
something that y ou’ve been a voiding, or trying a new ski ll.
Nutrition
When your body isn’t getting enough nutrients, your mood is likely to be
affected— you might experience lower mood, hanger  (anger related to hunger!),
and anxiety—and it will be harder to get to your wise mind. So, it’s important
that you eat enough (for example, not skipping meals or restricting calories,
eating enough nutritious foods), but not too much (for example, by binge-
eating, or regularly overeating). It’s also helpful to be aware of how much
caffeine you’re ingesting as this is a stimulant that can contribute to anxiet y,
anger emotion s such as irritability, and poor sleep. Sugar is another substance
that can increase emotional instabi lity, as can dehydration. So, being aware of
how much sugar you’re consuming and whether you’re drinking enough liquids
will also help y ou incr ease ac cess to y our wise mind.
Getting Exercise
It’s a well-known fact that exercise can help us manag e emotions more
effectively. Some studies have shown that exercise that increases heart rate is
just as effective at reducing  depression as anti-depr essant medication (if we
think of depression as being in the red zone, and exercise increases the heart
rate moving us back down toward green, this makes sense!). Even if you don’t
experience depression, exercise can help you manage emotions in healthier
ways and incr ease y our ac cess to wise mind.
Reducing Screen Time
Over the last few decades, as technology has changed, people have been
looking at screens for longer periods of time. Resear ch shows that excessiv e
screen time has a negativ e impact on the developing brains of children and
adolescents (shock er, right?). While the brain is conside red fully developed at
about the age of twent y-five and therefore its development isn’t affected by
technology after that age, social media can also contribute to emotion
dysregulation, making it more difficult for us to access our wise mind. The
recommendation is that we spend no more than two hours each day using
screens r ecreational ly and that we turn technology of f sixty minutes bef ore bed.
Activity: Consider How to Get STRONGR
Consider the following questions (adapted from Van Dijk 2022) to help increase
your abi lity to ac cess wise mind.
Sleep
Approximately how man y hours of sleep do y ou get each night?
Do you gener ally feel rested upon w aking?
Do you usual ly tak e a nap? If so , for how long?
After y ou nap , do y ou usual ly feel bet ter or worse?

Do you ingest substances that might interf ere with sleep , such as caf feine or other
stimulants (cof fee, tea, ener gy drinks, caf feine pi lls, diet pi lls, chocolate)?
Based on y our answers, and k eeping in mind that too much or too l ittle sleep can
leave you feeling irri table, lethar gic, and sluggish, do y ou need to incr ease or
decrease the amount of time y ou’re sleeping?
If you’ve identi fied this as an ar ea to work on, what ’s one smal l step y ou can tak e
to start working tow ard that goal? (F or example, i f you need to incr ease sleep , you
could set a goal to go to bed fi fteen minutes earl ier tonight, then work y our w ay
up, or you might identi fy needing to r educe caf feine to impr ove sleep .)
Treat Physical and Emotional Health Problems
Do you have physical or emotional health problems that require medication or other
treatment? If so, do you follow your healthcare providers’ recommendations for
treatment?
If you’ve identi fied this as an ar ea to work on, what ’s one smal l step y ou can tak e
to start working tow ard that goal? (F or example, y ou could learn mor e about y our
illness to understand wh y the tr eatment is necessary .)
Resist Using Drugs and Alcohol
Do you currently drink alcoho l or use drugs (including illicit, prescription, and over-
the-counter medications)? If so , what do y ou use, and how often?
Do you see y our use causing pr oblems f or you in work, school, r elationships, or an y
other aspect of y our life?
Has an yone told y ou your substance use is a pr oblem?
When y ou’re using drugs or alcohol, do y ou tend to do things y ou later r egret?
Do you find y oursel f turning to drugs or alcohol to deal wi th emotions?
If you’ve identi fied this as an ar ea to work on, what ’s one smal l step y ou can tak e
to start working tow ard that goal? (F or example, i f alcohol is a pr oblem, y ou could
set a goal to drink only one night on the week end instead of two and decr ease
your consumption f rom ther e. If y ou don’ t think this is a pr oblem y ou can handle
on your own, y ou might set a goal to look into get ting help .)
One Thing Each Day to Build Mastery
List at least thr ee things y ou do to bui ld mastery:

How man y days per week do y ou do an activi ty that bui lds mastery?
If you’ve identi fied this as an ar ea to work on, what ’s one smal l step y ou can tak e
to start working tow ard that goal? (F or example, y ou might start b y making a l ist of
activities you used to do that ga ve you this f eeling.)
Nutrition
Do you eat thr ee heal thy meals as wel l as some snacks each da y?
Do you find y oursel f eating just because y ou ha ve an ur ge to—ma ybe out of
boredom or due to another uncomf ortable emotion?
Do you not eat, or pur ge food (f or example, b y vomiting, o verexercising, or using
laxativ es) to lose weight or f eel mor e in contr ol?
How much caf feine do y ou ingest each da y?
How man y glasses of w ater (or other non-caf feinated l iquids) do y ou drink each
day?
Sometimes, people dev elop pr oblems wi th eating f or which they need to seek
professional help , and tr auma is associated wi th a gr eater incidence of eating
disorders. If y ou feel you ha ve an eating pr oblem y ou can’ t manage on y our own,
please speak to a heal thcare professional. If that ’s not the case, but y ou’ve
identi fied eating as an ar ea to work on, what ’s one smal l step y ou can tak e to start
working tow ard that goal? (F or example, i f you curr ently eat one meal a da y, you
could set a goal to start eating something smal l for breakfast and work y our w ay
up.)
Getting Exercise
Do you curr ently do an y type of ex ercise? If so , how often and f or how long?
If you ha ve any physical heal th problems, please check wi th your doctor bef ore you
start an ex ercise routine. If y ou’ve identi fied ex ercise as an ar ea to work on, what ’s
one smal l step y ou can tak e to start working tow ard that goal? (F or example, i f you
currently ex ercise once a week f or fifteen minutes, y ou could incr ease this to twice
a week and work y our w ay up to mor e.)
Reducing Screen Time
How much time in a day are you looking at a screen, not related to work? (If you’re
losing time because y ou’re on y our phone, that ’s also important to note her e!)
Do you notice painf ul emotions r esulting from your scr een use (such as r eading
about certain topics that bring up str ong feelings)? W rite your thoughts her e:

Do you find y our use of scr eens interf ering wi th your abi lity to connect wi th family
and friends? (F or instance, has an yone commented on how much time y ou spend
on technology? Do y ou find y oursel f dividing y our at tention between talking to y our
loved ones and looking at y our phone?)
Do you use y our phone or other scr eens right up unti l bedtime?
If you’ve identi fied scr een time as an ar ea you need to work on, what ’s one smal l
step y ou can tak e to start working tow ard that goal? (F or example, i f you find
yoursel f on y our phone f or six hours a da y, perhaps y ou set a goal to shut down
technology fi fteen minutes bef ore bed and y ou can work y our w ay up to mor e.)
It can be easy to o verwhelm y oursel f by taking on too much at once, so i f you’ve
identi fied mor e than one STRONGR ski ll to work on, decide what y ou’d l ike to work
on first and wri te it here:

Activities to Increase Access to Wise Mind
The STRONGR skills will help you access your wise mind through making concr ete
lifestyle changes; now, let’s look at some specific activities you can do to help you
access y our wise mind.
Creating a Shortcut
It can be helpful to have a “shortcut, ” a person who represents wise mind
for you. When you’re facing a difficult situation, you can draw on this resour ce to
help you get to that more balanced state (for examp le, one of my clients
identi fied Superman as representing wise mind, so he would ask himsel f, “What
would Superman do?” to help him ac cess this state).
The person you use as your shortcut can be anyone: a person from your
life, like a friend or family member; a famous person; a religious or spiritual
figure; or a fictional figure from your favorite novel or movie. Who represents
wise mind f or you?
Notice What State of Mind You’re In
When you’re trying to make any kind of change, you need to first increase
awareness. You won’t think to try to access your wise mind until you realize
you’re not there and you want to be. So, start checking in with yoursel f, at least
a few times a day, to see what state of mind you’re in: What part is up front
right now? An emotional part, a reasoning part, or your wise mind? If you
struggle to remember to do this check in, pair it with something you do multiple
times daily. Every time you eat (as long as you eat at least three times a day) or
every time you wash your hands, for example, you can use that as a cue to ask,
“What state of mind am I in?” Sticky notes and cell phone reminders can also
come in handy!
Ask Your Wise Mind a Question
It can be helpful to practice communicating with your wise mind: start
checking in with this part of yoursel f, asking it what you should do or what it
thinks about a situation you’re facing. The trick here is to do this before
emotions become intense: if your emotional or reasoning mind are already in
charge, wise mind will be more difficult to access. You might decide to
incorpor ate this into your daily routine as well. Every morning at breakfast, for
example, you could ask your wise mind what it thinks about your plans for the
day. As time goes on and with practice, you’ll be more able to draw on this
internal wisdom when things ar e mor e difficult.
Practice Mindfulness
Most mindfulness practices will help you access your wise mind. Remember ,
focusing on one thing at a time, in the present moment, with your full attention,
and with acceptance typical ly means less emotional pain— and you may become
aware that you’re not in your wise mind at this point, which helps you move
toward it! You might want to experiment with guided mindf ulness practices (or
you ma y have a pr actice y ou use alr eady that helps y ou get to y our wise mind).
Some people resonate with wise mind being in a certain area of their body
(often the heart area, but see what feels right for you). Ask your wise mind a
question and, as you mindf ully focus on the area of your body where you sense
that part, see i f you get a r esponse thr ough body sensations.
Keep in mind that, if emotion s are already intense, you might need to use
other skills before turning to mindf ulness: stick your face in cold water, do a
forward bend, or do something to move you from red to yellow or yellow to
green.
Wrapping Up
In this chapter , you’ve learned what mindf ulness is, how it will be helpful, and
how to practice it safely. Mindfulness increases your self-awareness and provides
a foundation for many other skills, so it’s important you understand it and practice
what y ou’re learning.
In this chapter , you also learned the DBT states of mind to help further your
understanding of some of the parts activity you might be aware of within
yoursel f and to increase your ability to access your wise mind. Over time and
with practice, this will start to come more naturally, but remember that CPTSD
makes everything more complex , so be patien t with yoursel f and your parts.
There are many more skills to come that will help you continue to put these
pieces together .
CHAPTER SIX.
Emotion Regulation Skills
In the last chapter , we looked at mindf ulness— what it is, how it helps in dealing
with the consequences of trauma, and how to do it. I hope you’re practicing and
remembering that skills like these don’t usually come easily, especial ly when
you’ve experie nced trauma; practice is imper ative as we’ll be building on what
you’ve learned so f ar in the coming chapters.
In this chapter , we’ll start delving more deeply into emotions: first by
looking at what you need to know about emotions and helping you consider your
experience of these feeling states so you’ll be more able to accurately name
them (rememb er, you have to be able to name it to tame it!), and then by
looking at ski lls to help y ou manage the emotions y ou struggle wi th.
What Is an Emotion?
If you grew up in an environment where your needs weren’t met—you were
abused, neglected, or you experienced relational wounding or trauma (such as
emotional ly absent or unattuned caregivers)— you likely have a compl icated
relationship with emotions. This is how people often learn to avoid emotions, and
you may have become so adept at this that you don’t know what you’re feeling
much of the time. S o, let’s start wi th the basics: what is an emotion?
We often refer to emotions as “feelings,” but in fact, the feeling is just one
aspect of an emotion. According to Linehan (1993), an emotion is a full system
response  involving thoughts, body sensations, urges (what you feel like doing),
and beha viors (what y ou actual ly do).
It’s also important to know that emotions serve different functions: they are
messengers that provide us with information (for instance, anger arises to
inform us a situation we’re facing is unjust), motiv ate us to action (for example,
to try to change the unjust situation), and communicate to others around us
(through our facial expression, body language, and tone of voice, those around
us will pick up on our anger without us having to tell them). From a DBT
perspectiv e, all emotions serve a purpose and are justified at times, meaning
they make sense given the situation, so it’s important we pay attention to them.
But remember , emotions could be coming from our emotion mind (or a trauma
part), so we’ll want to access our wise mind to make choices about what to do
with the emotion. We’ll look at options for changing or reducing emotions in the
next few chapters, but first, we need to become familiar with some of the basic
emotions and their di fferent components.
The following Emotion Reference Sheets (adapted from Van Dijk 2022) look
at some of the more common painful emotions and their different components;
you’ll have an opportuni ty to consider your own experience of each of these
emotions since ev eryone’s experience of emotions is unique.
As you start to pay attention  to your experience of emotions, you can refer
to these reference sheets so that over time you’ll be more able to accurately
name them (or perhaps confirm that you’re already able to do this). I’d suggest
you read through these reference sheets now and come back to them at times
when you’re feeling a strong emotion. The emotions we’re looking at here have
been identified in infants and can therefore be described as hardwired in the
human br ain.
Emotions Reference Sheets
Anger
Anger’s  purpose : Anger arises when someone or something gets in the way of
you moving toward a goal, or when you or someone you care about is being
attacked, thr eatened, insul ted, or hurt.
What anger does: Anger typical ly causes people to become aggressive,
possibly causing them to physical ly or verbally attack what they see as
danger ous, to make the threat go away. When the human race was evolving and
there wer e constant thr eats in the en vironment, anger helped us surviv e.
Example of when anger is justified: You’re recogni zing the abuse you
endur ed as a child. You’re now dealing with CPTSD as a result, which has
hamper ed your ability to reach your goals and you’re angry that no one
recogniz ed what w as happening and helped y ou; anger is justi fied.
Examples of anger thoughts:  This should never have happened; it’s not fair.
And it’s not fair that I’m paying the price for the things that were done to me.
Anger thought s often involve judgment (like it’s not fair or this shouldn’ t be
happening ).
Activity: Describe Your Anger
Describe a r ecent time y ou felt angry:
Body sensations:  Look at the ph ysical sensations connected to anger and check
off any that y ou experienced in this si tuation.
Tense muscles, such as clenching fists or jaw
Trembling or shaking
Racing heart
Increased breathing rate
Change in body temperature, which might lead to feeling hot or cold
Other:
What ur ges did y ou notice?
What did y ou actual ly do?
Other words for anger:  If anger doesn’ t quite fit how y ou felt in the si tuation
you described, cir cle the wor d(s) that bet ter describe how y ou felt.
Annoyed Frustrated Irritated Exasperated
Resentful Bitter Mad Irate
Furious Aggravated Bothered Incensed
Impatient Enraged Outraged Hostile
Indignant
If you can think of other wor ds that fi t better, add them her e:
Keep in mind that just because a feeling is justified doesn’ t mean you
should act on the urges associated with it. For example,  you can feel anger at
your older sibling for leaving home and not being there to protect you, and not
verbally abuse them f or having done so .
Fear and Anxiety
Anxiet y is different from but very related to fear. They feel the same
physical ly, but fear is present -focused and related to a specific threat, triggering
the fight-or-flight response to help you surviv e; anxiet y is future-focused and
comes up when there’s a more gener al threat you’re worrying about —something
that hasn’t happened and may never happen. Anxiet y also comes up when
there’s something you might reasonably expect to happe n, but you expect the
results to be catastr ophic or out of proportion with reality. So, if you’re driving on
the highway and you’re thinking What if someone hits me? you’re likely going to
feel anxious.
While there are times when fear is justified, there isn’t really a time when
you should feel anxious, or when you can say that anxiet y is justified, because
anxiet y involves a fear of something that isn’t a real threat—even if it feels that
way! However, without some anxiet y, you might take more risks, like driving
danger ously. So, we’re not trying to get rid of anxiet y (or any emotion, since all
emotions serve a purpose), but if you have anxiet y regula rly—or to the extreme,
such as panic attacks— you want you to be able to manage it better, instead of
letting it contr ol you.
Fear’s purpose: Fear is justified when there’s a threat to your health, your
safety, or your wel l-being or to that of someone y ou car e about.
What fear does:  Fear motiv ates you to act to protect yoursel f or those you
care about.
Example of when fear is justified: You want to leave your abusiv e partner ,
but they’ve threatened to take the children and they’ve done this before. Fear is
justified because the saf ety of y our lo ved ones is thr eatened.
Examples of anxious thoughts:  Anxious thoughts are future-focused worry
thoughts often consisting of what-ifs: What if I make a fool of myself? What if I
can’t do it? What i f I nev er find someone else who lo ves me?
Activity: Describe Your Anxiety
Describe a r ecent time y ou felt fearful or anxious:
Body sensations:  Look at the ph ysical sensations connected to f ear and anxiet y
and check of f those y ou experienced in the si tuation.
Tense or tight muscles
Trembling or shaking muscles
Racing heart
Increased breathing rate
Change in body temperature, which might lead to feeling hot or cold
Other:
As you recall your experience  of fear or anxiet y, did you notice a similarity to
what you experience when you feel angry? The body sensations can be very much
the same, which is one reason why it can be easy to mix up feelings of fear or
anxiet y and anger!
Urges and behaviors: With fear, urges and beha viors include running a way from
the thr eat to pr otect y oursel f or others. Wi th anxiet y, urges and beha viors in volve
avoiding a si tuation (l ike choosing not to go to work because y ou’re worried that
you’ll have a panic at tack and mak e a fool of y oursel f) or escaping the si tuation i f
you’re already in i t (like leaving work early because y ou’re feeling anxious).
What ur ges did y ou notice when y ou wer e in the si tuation y ou described?
What did y ou actual ly do?
Other words for fear: If fear doesn’ t quite fit how y ou felt in the si tuation y ou
described, cir cle the wor d(s) that bet ter describe how y ou felt.
Panicky Terrified Scared Apprehensiv e
Nervous Worried Dreading Disturbed
Stressed Startled Alarmed Edgy
Jump y Jittery Troubled Anxious
Concerned Uneasy
If you can think of other wor ds that fi t better, add them her e:

Sadness
Sadness’s  purpose : Sadness is the emotion felt when things aren’t the way you
expected them to be or when y ou’ve experienced a loss.
What sadness does: This is the emotion that motiv ates you to try to regain
what you’ve lost, or to seek comfort from others; sadness might also encour age
those ar ound y ou to try to be of help or of fer support.
Examples of when sadness is justified: You think about your younger self
and your needs that went unmet; your partner is ending your relationship; or
someone close to y ou is diagnosed wi th a terminal i llness.
Examples of sad thoughts: When we’re feeling sad, the tendency is to focus
on the loss we’ve experienced and the disappointment we feel. Some examples
of sad thoughts include Things are hopeless/pointless , I’m not worth while, or I
have no one.
Activity: Describe Your Sadness
Describe a r ecent time y ou felt sadness:
Body sensations: Look at the ph ysical sensations connected to sadness and
check of f those y ou experienced in the si tuation.
Tightness in chest or throat
Heaviness in chest or heart
Tears in eyes
Slumped posture
Tired or heavy body
Other:
Urges and behaviors: Urges and beha viors associated wi th feeling sad often
involve withdrawing f rom others or crying.
What ur ges did y ou notice when y ou wer e in the si tuation y ou described?
What did y ou actual ly do?
Other words for sadness:  If sadness doesn’ t quite fit how y ou felt in the
situation y ou described, cir cle the wor d(s) that bet ter describe how y ou felt.
Disappointed Discour aged Distraught Resigned
Hopeless Miserable Despair Grief
Sorrow Down Distressed Depressed
Heartbr oken Unhapp y Despondent
If you can think of other wor ds that fi t better, add them her e:

Envy
Envy’s  purpose : Envy is the emotion that comes up when someone has
something y ou want.
What envy does: Healthy envy motiv ates us to work to get what we want. For
example, if you envy a cowork er who received recogni tion at work, you’ll work
harder so you might also be rewarded. But envy can also play out in unheal thy
urges, such as acting in ways to try to make the other person look bad to others,
or trying to tak e away or ruin what they ha ve.
Example of when envy is justified: You have feelings for your best friend’ s
partner —you envy your best friend for that relationship . Seeing someone who
seems to have everything—lots of money , a great career, a beauti ful house, a
happy marriage— wanting (understandably!) what that person has is justi fied.
Examples of envy thoug hts: When envy is accompanie d by feelings of
happiness for the other person, it can be quite healthy. As noted earlier, envy
can motivate us to work to get the things we want: I’m happy my cowork er got
that promotion, but damn, I wish that had been me! When envy is accompanied
instead by feelings of anger , it can be detrimental and cause us to get stuck in
self-pity and unheal thy behaviors: It’s not fair; why can’t I have that? Why do
they get al l the luck and I get nothing but suf fering in l ife?
Activity: Describe Your Envy
Describe a r ecent time y ou felt envy:
Body sensations:  Look at the ph ysical sensations connected to en vy and check
off those y ou experienced in the si tuation.
Tight or rigid muscles
Teeth clenching
Mouth tightening
Face flushing
Pain in the pit of the stomach
Other:
Urges and behaviors: Healthy urges and beha viors r elated to  envy usual ly
involve pushing y oursel f to try har der to impr ove yoursel f or your si tuation.
Unheal thy urges and beha viors include at tacking, cri ticizing, or a voiding the person
you en vy, or doing something to mak e them f ail, look bad to others, or lose what
they ha ve.
What ur ges did y ou notice when y ou wer e in the si tuation y ou described?
What did y ou actual ly do?
Other words for envy:  If envy doesn’ t quite fit how y ou felt in the si tuation y ou
described, cir cle the wor d(s) that bet ter describe how y ou felt.
Craving Covetous Hungry Wanting
Desirous Longing Resentf ul
If you can think of other wor ds that fi t better, add them her e:

Jealousy
Jealousy’s  purpose : This emotion  arises when an important relationship or
sense of belonging is in danger of being lost or taken away (so, the main
difference between envy and jealousy is that envy is a desire for something that
others ha ve; jealousy is a f ear of losing something or someone y ou car e about).
What jealous y does: Jealousy typically causes people to try to protect what’s
“theirs” (wheth er accurate or not!) and to not share the people or things they’re
afraid of losing.
Examples of when jealousy is justified: You find out your partner has been
talking to their ex. Or, you reached out to two of your close friends to get
together , but no one respond ed; weeks later you find out they met up without
you—ouch.
Examples of jealous thoughts:  They’re going to leave me. No one cares
about me. I’m going to lose everything.  Jealousy can also be thought of as
anxiet y about losing someone or something that ’s important to y ou.
Activity: Describe Your Jealousy
Describe a r ecent time y ou felt jealous:
Body sensations:  Look at the ph ysical sensations connected to jealousy and
check of f those y ou experienced in the si tuation.
Racing heart
Breathlessness
Choking sensation
Lump in throat
Tense or tight muscles, such as clenching teeth
Other:
Urges and behaviors: Urges and beha viors associated wi th jealousy include
being violent or thr eatening violence tow ard the person y ou feel thr eatened b y;
trying to contr ol the person y ou’re afraid of losing, including interr ogating or
accusing them, or snooping thr ough their belongings; acting in a cl inging,
dependent w ay; or incr easing demonstr ations of lo ve, like trying to spend mor e
time together .
What ur ges did y ou notice when y ou wer e in the si tuation y ou described?
What did y ou actual ly do?
Other words for jealousy:  If jealousy doesn’ t quite fit how y ou felt in the
situation y ou described, cir cle the wor d(s) that bet ter describe how y ou felt.
Protective Suspicious Possessive Covetous
Distrustful Rivalrous Clingy Insecure
If you can think of other wor ds that fi t better, add them her e:
Guilt
We often feel guilt and shame in the same situations, and many aspects of
these emotions are similar, which can cause us to confuse them. These emotions
are very common for people with CPTSD (and are very connected to that
negativ e self-view), and shame especial ly can be very powerf ul in keeping
people dysr egulated. W e’ll cover shame in the next r eference sheet.
Guilt’s purpo se: Guilt is the feeling that’s justified when you’ve done
something that goes against y our values, and y ou judge y our beha vior.
What guilt does: Guilt motiv ates you to make amends and not act a certain
way in the f uture.
Examples of when guilt is justified: You say somet hing to hurt your partner
during an argument, or your boss overpays you and you decide to keep the
money and not tell them. Your behavior doesn’ t match your values, so you feel
guilty.
Examples of guilt thoughts: When feeling guilty, we tend to think judgmental
thoughts about our behavior: That was wrong, I shouldn’ t have done that. It’s
my fault. We might also dwel l on past beha viors when f eeling gui lty.
Activity: Describe Your Guilt
Describe a r ecent time y ou felt guilty:
Body sensations: Look at the ph ysical sensations connected to gui lt and check of f
those y ou experienced in the si tuation.
Feeling jittery or agitated
Hot, flushed face
Bowed head
Other:
Urges and behaviors: When f eeling gui lty, you often w ant to mak e amends, such
as thr ough apologizing.
What ur ges did y ou notice when y ou wer e in the si tuation y ou described?
What did y ou actual ly do?
Other words for guilt.  If guilt doesn’ t quite fit how y ou felt in the si tuation y ou
described, cir cle the wor d(s) that bet ter describe how y ou felt.
Remorsef ulApologetic RegretfulSelf-reproachf ul
Contri te Sorry
If you can think of other wor ds that fi t better, add them her e:
Shame
Shame’s  purpose : Sham e protects you by keeping you connected to others.
Shame arises when you judge yoursel f for something you’ve done, or for
something about yoursel f as a person that you fear may cause people to reject
you if they knew about i t.
What shame does: Shame causes you to hide— your behavior, or that
characteristic of yoursel f—so you can remain connected to people who are
important to you. Shame is also the emotion that stops you from doing that
behavior again in the future. If people know about your behavior (or
characteristic), shame causes y ou to try to mak e amends in those r elationships.
Examples of when shame is justified: You engage in a target behavior (like
drinking, using drugs, or gambl ing) as a way of coping with your emotions and
you hide the behavior so others won’t reject you. Whether or not shame is
justified in this example depends on who you’re hiding from. Some people might
reject you for what you did, in which case shame is justified; it protects you,
causing you to hide the behavior and keep you connected. But others (like your
significant other or your therapist) hopef ully would not reject you, in which case
shame isn’ t justi fied.
You may also experience shame if there’s something  that makes you
different from others, or at least you believe it makes you different. This could
include things like your trauma history , sexual or gender identity, a mental health
or addiction problem, or a particular belief you hold. Hiding that part of yoursel f
protects you from being rejected by others. It’s sometimes difficult to tell if
shame is justified or not because this involves knowing what others would think
if they knew about this thing. For instance, many people still attach stigma to
mental illness, and if your friend has previously insisted that “people shouldn’ t
let their past hold them back,” then you’ll likely keep quiet about your CPTSD to
avoid their judgment. Or, if your friend has confided in you about their own
difficult past or mental health problems, you’ll be more certain you can open up
without f ear of r ejection.
More often than not, shame isn’t justified. It often comes up, though,
because it’s the awful, soul-sucking feeling that arises when we judge ourselv es.
So, instead of thinking I shouldn’ t have had that drink (causing guilt), you’re
thinking What’s wrong with me that I drink to cope?  or I’m awful. Judging
yoursel f for something you’ve done or for something you think makes you
defective will cause y ou to f eel shame.
One reason we often confuse guilt and shame is that we often feel both at
the same time, as we judge our behavior (leading to guilt) and we judge
ourselv es for having done that beha vior (leading to shame).
Examples of shame thoug hts: When we feel shame, we’re usually judging
ourselv es in some way: I’m defective. There’s something wrong with me. If
others knew the real me, they would leave. With shame, there is also often an
element of f earing that others wi ll reject us.
Activity: Describe Your Shame
Describe a r ecent time y ou felt shame:

Body sensations: Look at the ph ysical sensations connected to shame and check
off those y ou experienced in the si tuation.
Pain in the pit of the stomach
Slumped posture, bowed head
Hot, flushed face
Sense of dread
Difficulty making eye contact
Other:
Urges and behaviors: Shame mak es you want to cr awl under the near est rock
and hide and isolate y oursel f from others, and mak es eye contact wi th others
difficult. Taken to the extr eme, i t can cause suicidal thoughts and beha viors.
What ur ges did y ou notice when y ou wer e in the si tuation y ou described?
What did y ou actual ly do?
Other words for shame:  If shame doesn’ t quite fit how y ou felt in the si tuation
you described, cir cle the wor d(s) that bet ter describe how y ou felt.
Mortification Self-loathing Self-disgust
If you can think of other wor ds that fi t better, add them her e:
There aren’t really many other words for shame. Sometimes we use
“embarr assed” or “humi liated” to describe the emotion, but both are different from
shame. Think of “embarr assed” as the feeling we have when  we trip up the stairs
or walk out of the bathroom with TP stuck to our foot: when we’re embarr assed,
we can laugh at ourselv es or the situation later. “Humi liation” is a little closer to
shame, but also involves anger—the sense of someone having caused us to feel
shame when we didn’t deserve it. In this sense, humiliation is usually more
tolerable than shame becau se anger often drives us to talk to others and seek
validation f or our f eelings; shame k eeps us disconnected and hiding.
This list might not include all the emotions you find difficult to bear, but they
are the more commonly distressing ones. This knowledge  is just the beginning,
howev er; what’s even more important is that you’re considering how this
information applies to you, and how you can use it in your life. We’re not usually
explicitly taugh t about emotions when we’re growing up; instead, we assume we
know what we f eel rather than exploring this f urther .
Let’s get you applying what you’re learning by thinking about situations in
your own life with the following Awareness of Emotions Worksheet (from Van
Dijk 2022). Fill out one of these worksheets when you have an emotion; my
recommendation would be at least a couple of times each week to increase your
familiarity with your emotions. It’s usually most helpful to complete the
worksheet as soon after the emotional ly charged situation as possible. I’ve
included a sample worksheet for your reference, as well as a blank worksheet,
which you can also download at this book’s websi te:
http://www .newharbinger .com/53103.
Awareness of Emo tions Worksheet: Example
Description of the situation that trigger ed the emotio n (just the facts!): My
supervisor , Tamara, was off sick. Our secretary called asking me to assist a client
who had come  in for an appointment with her, not having received the message
that she was away . I spoke to the client and was able to help; they left satisfied. On
Tamara’ s return to the office, she reprimanded me for intervening with her client
and asked me not to do this again.
What thoughts did you have about this situation (including judgments,
interpretations, assumptions)?  What’ s wrong with her?! I did her a favor by
helping; I didn’t get anything out of it, but she’ s worried I’ll make her look bad. I
know she just wants me gone.
What physical sensations did you notice?  Heat in my body , heart racing,
shallow breath, shaking, muscle tension.
What urges did you experience?  I wanted to yell at T amara and tell her how
selfish she is.
What did you actually do?  I didn’t say anything. I hid in my office because I don’t
want her to see how much this bothers me. I also don’t want to rock the boat at
work because I know she’ s doing her best to get rid of me.
What is the name of the emotion(s) you were experiencing?  Anger and
anxiety .
Awareness of Emo tions Worksheet
Description  of the situation  that triggered  the emotion  (just the facts !):
What thoughts did you have about this situation (including judgments,
interpretations, assumptions)?
What physical sensations did you notice?
What urges did you experience?
What did you actually do?

What is the name of the emotion(s) you were experiencing?
Mindfulness of Emotions
You may be struggl ing to notice things you’re being asked to notice in this chapter
—man y people  have learned that it’s safer or more comfortable to avoid turning
inward and paying attention to these things; it becomes second nature to ignore
internal experiences instead. But hopef ully, you’re starting  to see the importance
to your recovery of increasing your self-awareness. So, how do you start to
consciously access what you’ve pushed away for so long? One way is through
mindf ulness.
In chapter five, we discussed how mindf ulness contributes to self-
awareness, including helping us become more in tune with our emotions. The
following mindfulness practice (adapted from Van Dijk 2022) will help you turn
inward and pa y attention, wi th acceptance, to those internal experiences.
Activity: Mindfulness of Emotions
To prepare for this practice, you might want to read the following script to yoursel f
until it comes more naturally for you when you start to practice. Alternativ ely, you
could record yoursel f readin g the script so you can play it back to guide you
through the practice until you get the hang of it. Or you could have someone read
it out loud to you. You can make this practice as short or as long as you’d like, so
remember to do what works  best for you right now. Also remember to keep your
eyes open during the practice, unless you know you won’t dissociate or have
flashbacks.
Start by getting as comfortable as possible, sitting in a dignified postur e with
your back fairly straight in your chair and feet flat on the floor. (If you experience
physical pain, do your best to adopt a postur e that you’ll be able to stay in for the
duration of the practice). Breathe deeply , noticing the feel of your belly expanding
as you inhale and deflating as you exhale. When you’re ready, slowly scan through
your body from the top of your head all the way down to the tips of your toes,
noticing any places you’re holding tension. Our body often provides helpful clues
for us; it’s not uncommon to clench your jaw or literally sit on the edge of your seat
when feeling a difficult emotion, so just observ e whatev er’s happening in your body
in this moment.
Allow yoursel f to become aware of any emotions that are present within you
right now. (If you don’t notice anything immediately , continue to scan through your
body until you pick up on something, howev er small or neutral it may seem. )
Where do you feel the emotion most strongly? Be curious about the sensations you
notice as best as you can, exploring them with openness. It’s natural to want to
avoid or resist emotions and sensations, especial ly if they’re uncomf ortable, but see
if you can be curious about them instead, just for a moment. Remember to
breathe.
Now see if you can nonjudgmental ly label your experience: factual ly describe
what you notice in your body. For instance, you might come up with a word to
describe the sensation of the feeling, such as tight, butterflies, knot, or hard. Notice
the size of the feeling: does it feel small, medium, or large? Perhaps it seems to
have a temper ature: hot, cold, or somewher e in between. Go with whatev er feels
right; you’re just listening to your body, noticing any sensations and the emotions
they might reveal. You’re not trying to make anything happen nor are you trying to
stop an ything f rom happening.
If you can, put a label on the emotion, such as bored, anxious , or content . If
you can’t put a name on it, just notice that. If you notice a thought or a story that’s
related to the emotion, just notice it without judging, as best as you can, and bring
your at tention back to whatev er physical sensations ar e most pr ominent right now .
If an emotion feels uncomf ortable or distressing, see if you can breathe into it,
continue to observ e it, and remind yoursel f that it isn’t permanent: emotions come
and go. If it gets to be too much, you can stop the practice and come back to it
another time.
Over time, this practice will help you recogniz e the different components of
your emotions so that you’ll be more able to accurately label them. For now, let’s
get you thinking about the practice you just did by answering the following
questions.
What did y ou notice in y our body?
What did y ou notice about y our thoughts?
What did y ou notice about y our emotions?
Were you able to distinguish between the ph ysical, mental, and emotional parts of
your experience?
Did you notice the emotions change in an y way?
Did you notice an y thoughts that br ought up or intensi fied an emotion or ph ysical
sensation?
It makes sense that this exercise might be painful, which is another reason to
keep the practice short to start; you’ll likely find your ability to tolerate will grow as
you practice. But if this exercise didn’t resonate for you, or if you found it too
difficult, know that there will be other tips to work on this as we go; you’ll also
learn other skills to decrease the intensi ty of emotions—starting with the next DBT
skill of nonjudgmental stance  (Linehan 2014).
Taking a Nonjudgmental Stance
For many of us, judgments are part of life: we judge ourselv es, others, and
situations; and we hear others judging regularly , which normal izes this behavior—
so much so that it becomes something we don’t question, and we don’t consider
the effects these judgments might be having on us. For those who’v e grown up in
abusiv e or pervasively invalidating environments, this tends to be even more of a
problem, often leading to chr onic shame and other intensely painf ul emotions.
Taking a nonjudgmental stance is about becoming aware of the language
you’re using, so you have the option of reducing judgments to decrease
emotional pain. Let ’s start b y looking at what we mean b y judgment .
What Is a Judgment?
In this context, a judgment is a word we don’t typical ly use in a neutral way that
provides a short-form, nonfactual label for someone or something. Examples
include, I’m worthless ; They’re an idiot; That was bad. Hopef ully, you can see that
these judgments— worthless , idiot, bad—aren’t words we use in a neutral way;
they aren’t facts. A fact, by the way, is something that is known to be true. It is a
fact that 2 + 2 = 4. It is a fact the sun rises and sets every single day and one
year consists of 365 days. Judgments are not facts (no, it is not a fact someone is
an idiot!). Judgments also don’t provide us with information—i f I told you that
someone was being an idiot, you’d have no idea what I meant by that since the
word idiot will mean different things to different people and different people will
evaluate behavior in different ways (you might not see anything problematic with
that person’ s beha vior).
Why does this matter? Judgments often inflame our emotions—in fact,
another way of thinking of judgments is inflammatory language . Judgm ents add
fuel to our emotional fire. So, what might start as irritation that your partner
forgot to take the garbage out, for example, can escalate to anger when you’re
judging them as an idiot for forgetting! To be clear, being nonjudgmental doesn’ t
typical ly eliminate an emotion but it helps prevent extra emotions from arising.
Let’s also be clear that I’m not suggesting you try to eradicate judgments—that ’s
impossible, and not necessa ry. But becoming aware of when judgments are
inflaming your emotions allows you the choice of doing something about them to
prevent extr a emotional pain.
What to Do with Judgments
Once you’ve become aware of your judgments, you have three options: First, you
might choose to continue judging. Let’s be honest, it can feel satisfying to let
those judgments fly! But are they helpful? That’s the question you need to ask
yoursel f. When you’re aware that they’re not—and potential ly even causing harm
—hopef ully, you’ll consider the other options. The second option is to let it go.
Just stop judging. This tends to be more doable when  we’re not emotional ly
attached to what we’re judging, such as I think it’s weird when people dye their
hair green. It doesn’ t impact my life if people dye their hair green, so I can easily
accept that some people do this. Not so easy, howev er, when we’re more
emotional ly invested (for instance, if the person dying their hair green is my
child). So, what then? Option three: we change the judgm ent to a nonjudgmental
(or neutr al) statement .
I’ve come to define a nonjudgmental statement as consisting of two things:
the facts of the situation (from our perspectiv e, of course) and our emotions.
Returning to my earlier example, a nonjudgmental statement might be, I’m
irritated with my partner for forgetting to put the garbage out. My irritation is
not likely going to disappear because I stop judging my partner but I’m not
inflaming the emotion, which means my irritation is likely to stay just that, rather
than turning into something mor e.
Activity: Taking a Nonjudgmental Stance
Now it’s your turn to practice . Read the following scenarios and follow the steps to
create a nonjudgmental statement. You can read suggestions for nonjudgmental
statements at the end of the chapter . The first one has been completed as an
example f or you to f ollow.
1. Cari judges himself as worthless  for having been unfaithful to his partner many
years ago .
What’ s the judgment we’re eliminating? I’m worthless.
What are the facts of the situation? I cheated on my partner .
What emotion(s) do you think Cari might be feeling? Shame.
Nonjudgmental statement combining facts and emotions: I feel shame for
cheating on my partner .
1. Felicia judges her friends as immatur e because they like to party every weekend
and continue to live their lives as though they’re in high school, even though
they’re now thirty. She feels like she doesn’ t fit in with them because their
values ar e so di fferent.
What’ s the judgment we’re eliminating?
What are the facts of the situation?
What emotion(s) do you think Felicia might be feeling?
Nonjudgmental statement combining facts and emotions:
1. Niall’s parents physical ly abused and neglected him and his siblings when they
were growing up and now he judges them as terrible par ents.
What’ s the judgment we’re eliminating?
What are the facts of the situation?
What emotion(s) do you think Niall might be feeling?
Nonjudgmental statement combining facts and emotions:
Now it’s your turn to think of your own judgments and go through this same
exercise. If you need help, consider asking someone you’re comfortable with. You
might also start with some of the less compl icated judgments you find yoursel f
making, such as judging other people’ s driving, or when your favorite sports team
is losing.
Describe the si tuation in which y ou’re judging:
What’s the judgment we’r e eliminating?
What ar e the f acts of the si tuation?
What ar e the emotions y ou’re feeling?
Nonjudgmental statement combining f acts and emotions:

Describe the si tuation in which y ou’re judging:
What’s the judgment we’r e eliminating?
What ar e the f acts of the si tuation?
What ar e the emotions y ou’re feeling?
Nonjudgmental statement combining f acts and emotions:
This is a compl icated skill, so practice is key; over time, being nonjudgmental
will start to come more naturally. Just remember that you get to choose when you
want to practice being nonjudgmental (or any skill); also remember that the more
you use this new way of thinking, the more you’ll be able to reduce your emotional
pain.
The Challenge of Self-Judgments
I mentioned earlier that shame is a common emotion for people with CPTSD
(often related to that negativ e self-view). If this is the case for you, I’d encour age
you to do some practice with judgments of others or situations until you get more
comfortable with this skill, then you can target your self-judgments more directly.
Let’s revisit the example wi th Cari to help y ou see how y ou might do this.
Cari often judges himsel f as a bad partner . To work on changi ng this
negativ e self-view, he considers wh y he judges himsel f in this w ay:
I was unf aithful to m y partner .
I get jealous and sometimes check m y partner ’s phone wi thout tel ling
them.
I lash out at m y partner when I’m angry .
By writing out this list, Cari has completed step one of creating a
nonjudgmental statement: he’s now got the facts of the situations in which he
judges himsel f to be a bad partner; now he just needs to add the emotions and
he has a list of nonjudgmen tal statements. The emotion s might be different in
each of these scenarios, or Cari might find that the emotion is the same (for
instance, shame). Remember , the emotion won’t necessari ly disappear
altogether , but when Cari is less judgmental toward himsel f, he stops inflaming
his emotions, making them more manageable; in the long run, his self-
compassion wi ll likely incr ease.
Let’s look now at a way of being nonjudgmental with your emotions that will
help y ou manage them mor e effectively: self-validation .
Self-Invalidation
An abusiv e, neglectf ul, or otherwise pervasively invalidating environment typical ly
teaches people to invalidate themselv es—to not accept, trust, or even
acknowledge their internal experiences (such as emotions, thoughts, and physical
sensations). This can show up in many ways even when you’re no longer living in
that environment: I often see people with complex trauma neglect their body by
not eating properly or not drinking enough fluids. This may be related to being
out of touch with body sensations, with no awareness of feelings of hunger or
thirst; even when there is awareness, there’s often a tendency to disregard those
sensations. There’s often a tendency to put their own needs last, prioritizing
everyone else and not engaging in self-care. The message to self here is My
needs/w ants don’t matter. Emotional self-invalidation is also quite common:
ignoring, avoiding, judging, or otherwise pushing emotions away (consciously or
unconsciously).
While all of these are import ant for you to consider in relation to your own
experience, we’r e going to f ocus on emotional sel f-invalidation.
What Is Self-Invalidation?
Invalidating your emotion means you’re judging your emotion in some way,
whether with words (for instance, This is stupid; I shouldn’ t be feeling this way)
or through not being willing to have the experience and trying to get rid of it
(often thr ough a tar get beha vior).
It’s understandable that if something’ s uncomf ortable, we don’t want to
experience it, but invalidating  ourselv es typical ly increases emotional pain. Let’s
look at Marjana as an example.
Marjana’s Story
Marjana gr ew up in a f amily that couldn’ t toler ate displa ys of intense
emotion. Whether she w as angry at her sibl ings, af raid of the dark, or
excited about some good news she’d r eceived, the message w as the
same: calm down, y ou’re being too emotional, too loud, too much. She
was often sent to her r oom because of her inabi lity to contr ol her
emotions and this left her f eeling disconnected f rom her f amily, like she
didn’t fit in, and ashamed. The r esult was Marjana doing her best to
avoid feeling those emotions and this pat tern has continued f or her as an
adult. She often suc cessfully squashes the emotion bef ore it can
intensi fy, but when she’ s in the car b y hersel f, especial ly driving home
from work after a har d day, anger wi ll often emer ge—at the person who
doesn’ t signal to change lanes, or someone who squeez es in f ront of her
at the last minute— and she’ s quickly enr aged. When she final ly catches
hersel f, the judgments turn in ward: What ’s wrong wi th me that I get so
angry? I’m an a wful person, and so on. Now , not only does Marjana f eel
angry at the person or si tuation that caused the anger in the first place
but she also f eels gui lt, shame, and anger at hersel f for feeling angry .
The Consequences of Invalidating Our
Emotions
Since we’re judging ourselv es for the feeling, invalidation also inflames our
emotions. Let ’s break this down using Marjana’ s example so y ou can see wh y.
First, Marjana encounters a situation that causes her to feel angry . This is
what we refer to as a primary emotio n—the first emotion that arises, or the first
responder  when we encounter a stimulus (just to compl icate matters, there can
be more than one primary emotion). If Marjana validated her primary emotion
(anger), she would likely only experience that emotion; instead, she judges
hersel f for it, and this leads to secondary emotions— how we feel about our
feelings (Linehan 2014). In this example, Marjana feels guilt, shame, and anger
at herself for feeling angry . It’s not uncommon to experience more than one
secondary emotion when we invalidate ourselv es. But here’s the moral of this
story: if we don’t judge ourselv es for feeling the primary emotion—i f we validate
it instead—then no secondary emotions wi ll be trigger ed.
Ways of Validating Emotions
Following are the three ways of self-validating that I teach my clients (Van Dijk
2012):
1. Acknowledging:  The first and simplest w ay of sel f-validating is
acknowledging the pr esence of the emotion: “I f eel angry .” By just
naming the emotion (as long as y ou name i t accurately), y ou’re validating
it. (Tip: if you’re not y et able to name y our emotions ac curately, I’d
suggest y ou return to doing the work in chapter six; whi le you work on
this, howev er, you can sel f-validate thr ough using a generic statement
like, I don’ t know what I’m f eeling right now , but whatev er it is, it’s okay
that I f eel it).
2. Allowing:  The second w ay of sel f-validating is giving y oursel f permission
to feel the emotion: “It ’s okay that I f eel angry .” Not only ar e you not
judging the emotion but y ou’re also going one step f urther and sa ying,
This is oka y—not meaning that y ou like it, but that y ou’re allowed to f eel
it.
3. Understanding:  This w ay of v alidating onesel f is typical ly the most di fficult
because y ou’re indicating an understanding of the emotion giv en the
current si tuation or based on y our past. F or instance, “It mak es sense
that I f eel angry because that person just cut me of f” (present context),
or “It mak es sense that I get angry when I’m driving because this is what
I learned f rom m y mom” (historical context).
Keep in mind that we don’t always understand why we’re feeling a certain
way, so we won’t always be able to validate our emotion  like this. If that’s the
case, we can still validate it by either acknowledging it or allowing it. And the
bottom line is that, as long as we’re not invalidating the emotion, we’re not
gener ating secondary emotions.
Activity: What Emotions Do You Need to
Validate?
1. In this activity, you’ll have an opportuni ty to consider how you do when it
comes to validating your emotions and some ways to improve in this area.
What emotions do you struggle to accept in yoursel f? Circle the ones you
struggle wi th.
Anger GuiltShame Fear
Jealousy EnvySadness Happiness
Other: 
  Other: 
1. Choose one of the emotions you circled in question #1 that you’ll start to work
on validating (remember , doing one at a time typical ly works best—if you circled
more than one, you can come back to work on the others later). Write the
emotion y ou’ll start wi th her e:
1. Write some of your thoughts about this emotion: Does it mean something
about you as a person if you feel this way? Do you know where these beliefs
developed? (Keep in mind messages about emotions commonly come from our
family of origin, as well as from our communi ty, and messages can be overt
where we’re verbally told we shouldn’ t feel a certain emotion, or more covert,
where we learn in more subtle ways that we shouldn’ t feel certain emotions. )
Write your thoughts her e:
1. Thinking of the three ways of validating that you’ve just learned, how can you
talk back to these thoughts when you feel this emotion? Write some validating
statements f or yoursel f here:

Now, of course, the important thing is to practice changing the way you talk to
yoursel f about this emotion . When you notice the emotion arising, read your
validating statements to yoursel f to help change your self-talk. You can also read
these statements to yoursel f more proactiv ely—just for the sake of practicing them,
pull out your list and review it now and then. The more you review these validating
statements, the mor e natur ally they ’ll come, ev en when the f eeling arises.
Wrapping Up
You’ve learned  a lot about emotions in this chapter , and hopef ully, you’re using
the reference sheets and the worksheet provided to increase (or evaluate) your
ability to name emotions accurately. You also had the opportuni ty to do a
mindf ulness practice to help with this and you learned the skills of nonjudgmental
stance and self-validation to help you manage those painful emotions by not
adding mor e fuel to y our emotional fir e.
Remember to take good care of yoursel f as you work through this book,
going at a pace that feels right for you, even if that mean s tempor arily putting it
aside so you can work on putting into practice what you’re learning or skipping
some sections that might be too triggering for you right now. Remember , we’re
still in stage one at this point, with the goal being stabilization, although some of
these ski lls will also be v ery helpf ul in stage thr ee.
In the next chapter , we’re going to dip our toes into stage two, deepening
your understanding of your self-system (your parts) and giving you some
strategies to work with these different aspects of yoursel f. If you don’t feel ready
for this just yet, feel free to pause and continue practicin g what you’ve learned
so far, or to move on to chapter eight, where we’ll be getting into more stage
three ski lls to help y ou mo ve on f rom your tr auma and bui ld a life worth l iving.
Answers to Nonjudgmental Stance Activity
What’s the judgment we’re eliminating?  They’re immatur e.
Facts:  My friends and I now have very different values and I don’t seem to fit in
with them anymore because  I’m moving on and growing up and they’re still
partying l ike they ’re twent y.
Emotions: Annoyed and disappointed in them.
Nonjudgmental statement:  I don’t feel like I fit in with my friends anymore, I
don’t like the way they’re acting, and I feel annoyed and disappointed in them
for not w anting the same things I do .
What’s the judgment we’re eliminating? Mom and Dad were terrible
parents.
Facts: Mom and Dad used to hit us and would make us fend for ourselv es to get
meals, do our own laundry , and so on f rom a v ery young age.
Emotions:  Angry and sad.
Nonjudgmental statement:  It makes me angry and sad to think of how our
parents tr eated us.
CHAPTER SEVEN.
Coming to T erms with T rauma
So far in this workbook, we’ve been focusing on stage one, where you’ve been
learning about the effects of trauma and skills to increase safety and stability in
your life. In this chapter , we’ll be delving more into workin g with your parts. This
may still be about stabilization if you have a particularly complicated self-system;
but this may also be stage two work, where you’re working on resolving past
traumas. Just to be clear, the trauma resolution work of stage two isn’t
necessari ly about remembering the traumas you’ve experienced but about
finding w ays to acknowledge what happened wi thout r eliving i t.
In this chapter , you’ll have the chance to become more familiar with your
parts and learn to communicate with them more effectively. You’ll also learn
skills to orient your parts, helping them move out of the past and into the
present, thereby reducing reexperiencing and helping your system come to
terms with the trauma you’ve experienced. Finally, we’ll look at a DBT skill to
help y ou come to terms wi th your tr auma thr ough acknowledging r eality.
A note before we start: you’re likely learning a lot about yoursel f as you do
this work, and while self-awareness is crucial, it can also be painful. If at any
point you feel you need a break, please take it. You might also need to go back
to review skills to maintain your stability as you do this work. And if you feel you
need support,  please be sure to reach out to a healthcare professional or
someone in y our support network.
What Are Parts?
First, if you’re struggl ing with the idea of having “parts, ” you’re not alone! When I
started learning  about this, I thought it was weird, even though I sometimes used
that language myself—“Part of me wants to do this, and part of me knows that’s
not a wise choice.” Then I began to see parts as the states of mind from DBT: I
could certainly  relate to having an emotional, reasoning, and wise part.
Sometimes, finding the language that fits best for you can help, so here are some
other w ays to conceptual ize parts:
Parts ar e memory networks: they include inf ormation r elated to a speci fic
time in y our life or a certain ev ent, so y ou ma y have parts r elated to
specific experiences y ou’ve had (f or instance, y ou might ha ve a part that
gets anxious when y ou driv e after ha ving a car ac cident).
Fisher describes y oung parts as “the chi ld you once wer e at a certain age
or the chi ld you had to be in certain si tuations. It ’s the l ittle you” (Fisher
2017, 155). Ther efore, you might notice parts as y oursel f at di fferent ages:
your thr ee-year-old part, y our sixteen- year-old part, and so on.
As you learned in chapter two , parts can be based on def ense systems, so
you might identi fy fight, fl ight, f reeze, submi t, or at tach parts.
These different parts or aspects of self we all have are also known as ego
states , defined as an “organized system of behavior and experience…bound
together by some common principles, and…separ ated from other such states by
a boundary that is mor e or less permeable” (W atkins and W atkins 1997 , 25).
Ego states occur on a continuum. On one end of the spectrum, there are
the healthy, adaptiv e parts; they have permeable boundaries, allowing
awareness of other parts and the information each holds. For example, I
remember my father once commenting, “That ’s not you!” after hearing me speak
professional ly—appar ently, he had never met my therapist part. Think of an area
of your own life where you bring a specific set of skills or mindset. For instance,
if you’re a parent, you likely act differently when you’re playing with your
children than when you’re social izing with friends. Or if you’re a student, sitting
in class listening to the professor will involve a different part of you than sitting
in a theater watching a movie. But you have awareness of these other parts of
yoursel f and ac cess to the memories and knowledge they hold.
At the opposi te end of the spectrum, we see extreme separation of parts (as
in DID); they have rigid, impermeable boundaries, preventing awareness of
other parts and blocking ac cess to the inf ormation held b y one another .
In the middle of this ego-state continuum, the boundaries are more
permeable, but there is still an unheal thy separ ation of parts. If you have
CPTSD, you’ll likely have less conscious awareness of your parts, less ability to
communicate with them, and more internal conflict. In this scenario , you’ll be
more likely to have exper iences of not understandin g yoursel f and your
emotional r eactions, f or example.
Ego states can dev elop in thr ee ways (W atkins and W atkins 1997):
1. Through normativ e, heal thy differentiation (f or example, as I learned and
trained to be a psy chother apist, I dev eloped m y ther apist part).
2. By unconsciously internal izing certain qual ities of others, such as bel iefs,
values, and beha viors. This commonly happens wi th chi ldren and par ents.
For example, i f your par ents alw ays ensur ed you said please and thank
you as a chi ld, as an adul t, you ma y judge people who don’ t say please
and thank y ou as impol ite. Your par ents’ v alue has been internal ized as
your own.
3. As a r eaction to tr auma: Experiencing tr aumatic ev ents can lead to the
formation of parts associated wi th those ev ents. F or instance, a chi ld who
is verbally and emotional ly abused b y a male car egiver dev elops a part
that’s trigger ed when they inter act wi th male authori ty figur es. When a
trauma part is activ ated, y ou ma y reexperience emotions, thoughts, and
physical sensations associated wi th the original tr auma.
Hopef ully this idea of parts—and the fact that everyone has them, to
varying degrees—is starting to resonate for you. You may have already started
to develop an awareness of some of your parts, but since awareness is the first
step to making changes, I’m going to help you learn more about your internal
system.
Getting to Know Your Parts
As you begin learning about your internal system, you may find that there are
certain parts you struggle with—you might not like some parts, or you may feel
anger , fear, shame, or other painful emotions toward them. It’s important for you
to know that parts are trying to protect you, even if that’s not readily appar ent.
You might recall Cory from chapter two, who had thoughts of suicide related to
feeling out of control; it might be difficult to see how thoughts of suicide can be
protectiv e, but from the perspectiv e of Cory’s twelve-year-old part who had no
other means of feeling in control when facing his highly critical father, this
becomes mor e understandable.
Thinking about our defense systems can also help: this may have been
Cory’s fight part, who, since he couldn’ t fight his father, would fantasiz e about
fighting back differently—by doing violence to himsel f. Similarly, someone who
turns to substances or disordered eating might be driven by a flight part trying
to protect the system b y escaping thr ough these beha viors.
If you’ve experienced ongoin g trauma, you might also develop a part that
imitates your abuser; this, too, would be a protectiv e part, keeping you safe by
verbally abusin g you to keep you in line so you don’t incur the wrath of the
abusiv e caregiver. The problem is that this part isn’t aware the abuse is over and
their means of pr otecting y ou is now harmf ul.
It’s important to bear in mind that we’re not trying to get rid of parts! The
goal of this work is to help you develop healthy communi cation and cooper ation
between you and your parts so your whole system is working together to
accompl ish the same goals. All parts play an important role, so we want them to
continue to do their jobs, but in a way that’s more effective and will make
everyone’s jobs easier! This is also where mindf ulness will be helpful: as you
notice an intern al experience, as best as you can, just allow yoursel f to be aware
of it and nonjudgmental ly describe it. Mindf ul observ ation like this activates the
prefrontal cortex —simply put, the thinking part of your brain—which will help
you put a little distance between you and the experience, making it more likely
you’ll be able to act from your wise mind. You’ll see this in action when we talk
about unblending later in this chapter .
In the following activity (based on Fraser 1991), you’ll have an opportuni ty
to meet and dialogue with your parts. I might sound like a broken record, but
remember that stability must come first, so please check in with yoursel f as you
do this activity and go at a pace that feels right for you, even if that means
stopping if things become too painful—you can always come back to this another
time.
As you get to know your parts over time, you’ll want to have a way of
referring to them. Please be sure to use nonjudgmental language: even if you
have complex emotions toward certain parts, it’s important to be respectf ul. For
instance, I had a client who had a part she initially referred to as “The Reject”—
ouch! After some discussio n, she renamed this part “The Rejected Part,”
indicating that this is how the part f elt, rejected b y others.
One more thing before we move into this exercise: for some people, this
exercise will feel like a natural experience— you might already have
conversations with your parts (essential ly, this is just a more elabor ate form of
talking to yoursel f). For others, howev er, it might feel strange, weird, or you
might find yoursel f (or part of you) judging it as stupid. Trust me, I get it! But let
me remind you that we all have parts. I myself have been surprised at times to
see how helpful this is for my clients (with and without CPTSD), so I’m asking
that y ou do y our best to be open to this experiment.
Activity: Meeting Your Parts
To begin this activity, be sure you have some time where you can sit quietly ,
without interruption. If you’re feeling unsur e about whether you’re ready to meet
your parts, consider having a support person close by if that’s comfortable or
possible. I’d also suggest setting a timer for this activity, starting with five minutes,
in case you dissociate. Most people find it helps to close their eyes for this activity,
but do what feels wise for you. This activity usually involves visual izing, but if you
struggle to do so (or if you know dissociation is possible), you can draw your
meeting place and parts as they come in (don’ t worry i f you’re not an artist!).
Start by imagin ing a neutral space where you’ll meet with your parts (this is a
different space from your calm place, from chapter four). This can be a real or
imagined place; it can be an indoor or outdoor space, but you’ll want it to be
comfortable for all parts and not associated with traumas. You can decor ate this
place however you’d like, bringing in chairs, couches, blank ets, pillows, or whatev er
you’d like to make it comfortable. Of course, since this is your imagination, you can
also make changes as you go. Let yoursel f settle in for a few moments until you
have a good sense of the space—i f possible, notice what you see, feel, hear, and
smell. Finally, you’ll want to create a door to this space if there isn’t one already—if
your meeting place is outside, for example, you might create a fence with a gate or
a magic door that leads to that space.
When you’re ready, open the door and invite in any parts that would like to
join you. All parts are welcome, but this is strictly voluntary , so parts get to choose
to come  or not. Some parts might just observ e without participating; others may
want to stay outside the meeting place and watch from a distance. Allow parts to
be wher ever’s most comf ortable f or them.
Parts may look like other versions of yoursel f (for instance, you at different
ages), but they might also take different forms: you may have parts that identi fy as
a gender different from yours, that appear as animals, or even inanimate objects.
Sometimes parts are insubsta ntial, like smoke or mist, or you might get more of a
felt sense of their presence, rather than seeing them; communications from parts
may be in the form of emotions or body sensations. Just allow yoursel f to observ e
whatev er happens. If no parts come at all, that’s okay—just remain in the meeting
place f or a whi le if that ’s comf ortable and get used to being in that space.
If you do have parts that come in, the next step is ensuring safety. Send your
parts the following message with your words and your body: This is a safe place for
everyone, where we’re working on getting to know one another; therefore,
everyone must agree not to hurt anyone else (including you!). If you have a part
who refuses to abide by this rule (You might actual ly hear voices in your head—no
you’re not crazy. This might present as thoughts of self-harm or suicide ; or just
thoughts about how stupid this exercise is and that there’s no way you’re going to
do this), please turn to the section where I’ll discuss how to close the meeting
place. If parts are agreeable (which you might experience as curiosi ty, interest, and
calm), continue wi th the ex ercise.
Thank your parts for joining you, and if you’d like, ask if anyone has questions
or comments. There’s no specific agenda for this first visit, other than beginning to
get to know parts. You might have a short dialogue with parts or, if no one has
anything to sa y, you can mo ve on to closing the meeting place.
Closing the Meeting Place
When you’re ready to finish the exercise, thank your parts for coming (even if they
didn’t agree to safety and you’re closing the meeting place early). Treat your parts
as you would want to be treated and remember that all parts are welcome and
have a role in your self-system. Let them know you’ll be back again to meet with
them, as you’ll return to your meeting place regularly to get to know your parts and
work on incr easing communication and cooper ation wi thin y our system.
Then, show your parts to the door and ask them to return to where they came
from (if you had child parts come in, be sure that they have someone to care for
them). When everyone’s gone, take a good look around to make sure you haven’t
missed anyone—close the door, lock it up, and turn out the lights (or whatev er you
need to do to close y our meeting place). After this pr actice, i t’s often helpf ul to tak e
a trip to your calm place (from chapter four) or do something else that’s calming or
relaxing.
You can answer the following questions as you reflect on what this experience
was like. Start by making a list or diagram of the parts who came to the meeting
place (I’d suggest you keep a separ ate list of your parts as this document will
change as you get to know your system). For each part, answer the following
questions:
1. Describe the part: If you can see them, what do they look like? If you can’t see
them, describe y our sense or experience of them:
1. How do you feel toward this part (remember to stay nonjudgmental, just noting
emotions)?

1. Does this part have any emotions toward you or toward other parts? For
example, it’s common for parts to dislike or feel anger toward young parts
because they often hold trauma material. If you have a part that imitates an
abuser , other parts might fear them; if you have a freeze or attach part, other
parts might be ashamed of behaviors the part engages in, such as self-harming
or people-pleasing. Noticing where parts position themse lves in relation to one
another in the meeting place can also provide helpful information. Write what
you noticed her e:
If you struggle to recall anything about what happened in the meeting
place, this could be related to dissociation— a sign that you’re not ready for this
work just yet. Please don’t be discour aged! Remember the number one priority
is getting and keeping you stable; not everyone will be ready to do parts work
right away, so it’s important to listen to what your system is telling you (there’s
likely a part protecting you!) and slow the work down when necessary or find a
therapist who can help y ou do this work saf ely.
How often you meet with your parts will depend. It’s possible (even likely)
that this was uncomf ortable— your parts came to be for a reason, and learning
about them means potential ly learning things about yoursel f and your past. If
you struggle to function for days after doing this exercise, I again urge you to
slow down and find a therapist if you’re able to. If, on the other hand, you’re
able to bounce  back—maybe you need a nap afterw ard (this can be exhausting
work!), or you need to do a lot of self-care for the rest of the day (not a bad
idea!), but then you feel like your usual self once again— going to your meeting
place sev eral days a week wi ll be v ery helpf ul.
There will often be a specific reason for communicating with parts—perhaps
you want to find out what your parts know about a certain problem or emotion,
or you’re struggl ing to make an important decision. When you open the meeting
place, you’ll invite in any parts that have information about that situation, as well
as any parts that would like to be part of the conversation (we don’t want
anyone feeling left out!). But the meeting place is also a time to check in with
your parts to see if they have concerns they’d like to address. Over time, you
might think of this as a family meeting where your system (your “internal
family”) learns to work together and resolve conflicts. Let’s return to Marguerite’s
story to see how she used the meeting place to learn about what was interfering
with sleep .
Marguerite’s Meeting Place
Marguerite was struggl ing wi th falling asleep at night; no mat ter how
tired she w as, as soon as she got into bed, she f elt wide a wake again.
She had tried sleep meds pr escribed b y her doctor , but this didn’ t help .
Going to her meeting place, Mar guerite ask ed if any parts had
information about the sleep pr oblems; not surprisingly , several young
parts wer e able to expr ess their f ear of going to bed because bedtime
was often when bad things would happen. B ased on the y oung parts’
fear, Marguerite came up wi th a plan to help her y oung parts f eel saf er:
she reminded them that they were safe with her and that they no longer
lived in the f amily home wher e the bad things had happened and she
would en vision hersel f tucking them into bed wi th her .
But Mar guerite also f ound out thr ough her meeting place that she
had a teenage part that just didn’ t want to go to bed so early! This part
wanted to sta y up w atching her f avorite show or r eading. Mar guerite was
able to negotiate wi th this part so that on week ends she’d be able to sta y
up a l ittle later doing things she enjo yed, but during the week, she’d get
to bed at a r easonable time so she could get up mor e easi ly in the
morning.
Of course, going to the meeting place is just the first step in the
process of impr oving communication and cooper ation wi thin y our sel f-
system. Let ’s look at what comes next.
Working with Your  Parts
Once you’ve started identi fying and learning about your parts, you’ll need to
watch for parts activity, noticing when they’re taking over. Hopef ully, you’ve
already been working toward this through noticing when you’re in emotion or
reasoning mind; mindf ulness  will also help, increasing awareness of emotions,
thoughts, and physical sensations that will alert you to parts becoming activated.
Once you become aware of this, you’ll be able to act from your wise mind to
unblend from parts.
Blending with Parts
When a part takes over and is in the driver’s seat—contr olling your
thoughts, emotions, physical sensations, and body functions— you’ve become
blended with that part (Schwartz 1995); you can’t tell the difference between
your experience and that of the part. This is what happens when you’ve been
trigger ed, but blending with a part isn’t inherently “bad”—i t can be helpful when
a part takes over to navigate a specific situation where that part’s skills are
required. Think  of a parent who’s a doctor —isn’ t it better for the doctor part to
take over when their child is injured, to deal with the immediate crisis, rather
than having the worried parent part in charge? But in a healthy system, the part
will unblend, stepping aside for the wise self to take the wheel again once that
need is resolved (in this example, when the medical crisis is over). When this
doesn’ t happen naturally and fluidly , howev er—as is often the case for
individuals with CPTSD when parts blend unnecessari ly or stay blended—i t
becomes pr oblematic.
How to Unblend
Remember that reasoning mind and emotion mind are parts, so mindf ully
noticing when you’re acting from one of these states and using skills to get to
your wise mind is unblending! And you can use the following steps to help you
further .
1. Assume that an y painf ul or o verwhelming thoughts and emotions ar e
communications f rom parts (Fisher 2017). ( Tip: B eing a ware of y our
triggers, discussed in chapter fiv e, will help y ou be mor e prepared for
parts activ ation in those si tuations. )
2. Rather than r eferring to parts’ experiences as yours (as in, I feel angry ),
refer to these as belonging to the part ( There’s a part of me that f eels
angry ). Notice what happens when y ou observ e and nonjudgmental ly
describe the parts’  experience—often people note a calmness, or sense of
relief as the part f eels v alidated.
3. See if you can cr eate some space between y oursel f and the part so y ou
still feel the parts’ f eelings, but less intensely , and y ou’re able to f eel
yoursel f at the same time. A change in y our body posi tion (l ike a forward
bend!), paced br eathing, or looking at y our hands to r emind y oursel f of
your curr ent age can help . Continue to use parts language: That part of
me is f eeling… or That part of me is thinking .
4. From your wise mind, consider what the part needs: If this w as your
child, your friend, or y our partner , what would y ou sa y or do f or them?
Depending on the age of the part, y ou might ask, What do y ou need to
help y ou feel less (angry , afraid, ashamed, etc. ) right now?  If this is a
child part, asking might not be appr opriate— a five-year-old can’ t usual ly
articulate what they need! S o, ask y oursel f, If this w as a fiv e-year-old
child with me right now , feeling af raid, what would I do or sa y? Then, go
ahead and try i t: for instance, imagine y oursel f having that con versation
with your sixteen- year-old sel f or feel yoursel f hugging that fiv e-year-old
child. Don’ t just think the wor ds or visual ize the hug but try to r eally feel
the emotion behind the wor ds and f eel the hug wi th your body , sending
the message wi th your whole sel f. Then notice i f the part r esponds. If y ou
don’t get a posi tive response, y ou can try again—ma ybe the part hears
your wor ds but doesn’ t feel them, or perhaps this part struggles to trust
and it will take time to bui ld a relationship wi th them. If the part is
responsiv e, notice what i t’s like for you that the part f eels soothed,
reassur ed, calmer , or whatev er their experience w as.
Let’s return to Mar guerite for an example of unblending wi th a part.
Marguerite Unblending
Marguerite identi fied sev eral parts in her system, including a nine- year-
old submi t part who would do whatev er she could to please others.
Marguerite recogniz ed that this part (who she cal led “Nine”) w as trying
to protect her —she had learned to submi t to her br other and her par ents
in order to surviv e—but Nine’ s people-pleasing w as now pr eventing
Marguerite from finding heal thy and f ulfilling relationships. Nine didn’ t
realize the tr auma w as over, they wer e now saf e, and the beha vior that
once helped pr otect the system w as now damaging.
Through pr acticing mindf ulness, Mar guerite became f amiliar wi th the
triggers f or Nine’ s people-pleasing beha vior and she began r ecognizing
when this part w as becoming activ ated—her br eathing became shal low;
she felt sudden, intense shame; and her body language changed, almost
as though she w as trying to mak e hersel f smal ler. Marguerite learned to
validate Nine—tel ling her that her shame used to help k eep her saf e, but
that the abuse w asn’t her f ault and she had nothing to f eel ashamed
about. Mar guerite work ed har d to show Nine that she car ed about her;
that Mar guerite was no longer nine y ears old but an adul t; that they
were no longer l iving in the f amily home wi th her abusiv e family, so Nine
no longer had to submi t to others to k eep them saf e; and that, as the
adult in the system, i t was actual ly Wise Mar guerite’s job to k eep them
safe, not a nine- year-old chi ld’s! Mar guerite still finds hersel f blended
with Nine at times, but this happens less often, and she finds i t easier to
unblend, r eassuring that y oung chi ld that she’ s safe and tak en car e of.
Orienting Parts
I’ve mentioned that trauma parts often live in trauma time, and don’t realize the
trauma is over and they’re safe now, because they don’t feel safe (remembe r,
when you’ve experienced ongoing trauma, your ANS has likely been trained to
neurocept signals around you as danger ous when they’re not). Orienting parts to
time increases feelings of safety, securi ty, and calm. For example, recall Cory with
the twelve-year-old suicidal part: we had to remind that part, over and over again,
that Cory was no longer twelve but thirty years old, he no longer lives at home
with his parents, and he makes his own choices now. Here are some other
strategies we used to orient that part to time:
What’s your addr ess now? And wher e did y ou live when y ou wer e twelv e
years old?
Who do y ou live with now? And who did y ou live with when y ou wer e
twelve?
Look at y our hands—do they look l ike twelv e-year-old hands? Or thirt y-
year-old hands?
Notice how y our body f eels as y ou sit on the chair: can y ou feel the length
of your body f rom the top of y our head to the tips of y our toes? Does this
match wi th how tal l you wer e, at the age of twelv e?
Does that twelv e-year-old part know what y ear it is? What ha ve you done
in your life since y ou wer e twelv e? (Gone to col lege? W orked in certain
jobs? Mo ved? Got ten married? Adopted a pet? Had chi ldren?)
Think of ways to orient your parts—the trick is to find what works for you,
and sometime s for each part. Make some notes here about things you do
already that help orient y our parts, and what y ou’re willing to try:

One thing I find helpful in working with parts—m y own and my clients—is to
remember that we’re trying to build healthy relationship s with these parts of
ourselv es, and relationships take time and effort. That young part of you might
not have gotten their needs met back then, but you can meet those needs now
and, in this way, you’re coming to terms with your trauma. Likewise, if your
traumas occurred in adulthood, you can meet the needs now of your adult self
that went thr ough the tr auma then.
Let’s turn now to a DBT skill to help you come to terms with your trauma:
acknowledging r eality as it is.
Acknowledging Reality
In DBT, this skill is known as reality acceptance (Linehan 2014), but I’ve come to
refer to it as acknowledging reality to help people understand that this isn’t about
liking or approving of something, or even being okay with it; we’re simply
acknowledging reality as it is. Let’s start by looking at how this skill will be helpful,
through an ex ercise.
Activity: Acknowledging Reality
Think of a difficult situation, either from your past or something that’s ongoing in
the present, that you’re no longer fighting but have accepted or acknowledged.
Here are some examples: going through a separ ation or divorce; not getting a job
you really wanted; losing a f riendship . Give that si tuation a ti tle and wri te it here:
Next, think about what it was like when that situation first happened (or, if it’s
an ongoing situation, when it first started); compar e that to what it’s like for you
now that you’ve acknowledged that reality. How did acknowledging reality change
your experience? Check the responses that resonate for you and add your own
thoughts in the space pr ovided.
The situation has less power over you.
You think about the situation less often.
It’s not as painful when you think about the situation now .
You’re more able to move on, or let go.
You’re more focused on the future.
There’ s a sense of relief, peace, or calm regarding the situation.
You feel like a weight has been lifted.
You can focus more on what to do about the situation.
Hopef ully, you can see how acknowledging reality will be helpful for you in
the future based on this experience. It can take a lot of energy and hard work to
acknowledge reality, especial ly when you have CPTSD, which inherently means
there’s a lot in your life to work on acknowledging in your recovery; recognizing
how this will help can motiv ate you to practice, even when it seems difficult or
even impossibl e. But you get to choose when you want to practice this skill, so if
you’re not feeling ready yet, there’s lots of other work you can be doing in the
meantime. If y ou do f eel ready, keep reading.
Fighting Reality
The opposite of acknowledgi ng reality is fighting reality (Linehan 2014). Human
beings tend to judge, push away, or otherwise try to avoid things that cause us
pain. Let’s use Marguerite’s trauma as an example of what fighting reality might
look l ike:
It shouldn’ t have happened; I shouldn’ t have been unsaf e in m y own
home.
It’s not f air that m y parents didn’ t protect me.
I should ha ve been able to stop the abuse.
It’s my fault.
While you might agree with some of Marguerite’s statements (“Of course, it
shouldn’ t have happened! ”), this fighting reality thinking isn’t helpful—it only
increases suffering. Recall the skill of nonjudgmental stance from the last
chapter , and how, when we judge, we inflame our emotio ns. The same happens
when we’r e fighting r eality.
Pain versus Suffering
In the context of this skill, we differentiate between pain, which consists of the
inevitable, unavoidable emotions we all experience as human beings, and
suffering, which involves the additional emotions we create when we refuse to
acknowledge reality as it is. Think of Marguerite’s situation: it makes sense that
she’ll feel anger , hurt, and sadness about the abuse she suffered—this is pain. But
when we consider her fighting reality statements, you can probably see how this
inflames her emotions and leads to suffering. For individuals with CPTSD, fighting
reality is often associated with the symptom of negativ e self-view, which increases
shame. For example, Marguerite’s thought, I should have been able to stop him,
will contribute to her suf fering in the f orm of shame.
Like any DBT skill, acknowle dging reality will not eliminate pain but it will
reduce and gradual ly eliminate suffering, so that, over time, you’ll only have the
pain. When we can reduce or eliminate our suffering, there’s more space for the
pain, making i t mor e bear able.
Steps to Acknowledging Reality
So, how do you get to the point of being able to acknowledge your reality? The
first step is to consider what realities you need to work on accepting in your life.
You might want to take some  time right now to start a list of these, but be sure to
write out the titles of the chapters rather than getting into details about each
chapter (for example, Marguerite might note “abuse by my brother” as one
experience she wants to accept). Once you’re aware of what you want to work
on, you can follow these steps to help you acknowledge the difficult situations in
your life.
1. Choose one thing f rom your list to start wi th. It’s a good idea to choose
something less painf ul to begin; y ou can come back f or the mor e painf ul
situations when y ou’re mor e comf ortable wi th the ski ll. If you’re
struggl ing to decide wher e to start, or y ou don’ t feel ready to work on an y
of the si tuations on y our list, think about other things y ou can pr actice
with instead: being stuck in tr affic, or the f act that i t’s raining on y our da y
off. Then, mak e a commi tment to y oursel f: as of right now , you’re going
to work on acknowledging this r eality:

1. Notice when y ou’re fighting that r eality and mak e note of the fighting
reality thoughts arising ( It shouldn’ t have happened , It’s my fault, It’s
awful):
1. Remind y oursel f of wh y you want to acknowledge this r eality. (For
example, I know that acknowledging this r eality will reduce m y suffering,
help me f eel mor e at peace,  and mo ve on wi th my life.) Then, ask
yoursel f how y ou can talk back to that thought. T ake a nonjudgmental
perspectiv e and change y our fighting r eality self-talk to acknowledging
reality instead:
Then repeat steps two and three over and over again: Notice when you’re
fighting reality and turn your mind back to acknowledging reality as it is. I refer
to this as the “internal argument, ” which is a normal part of the process of
acknowledging r eality—you’ll waffle back and f orth!
Because fighting reality can be very ingrained in your self-talk, you may
want to write out some statements to read when you find yoursel f falling back
into fighting reality; this will gradual ly help shift your thinking to acknowledging
that this is your reality. Here are some statements Marguerite came up with to
help her acknowledge the r eality of her chi ldhood:
My br other abused me; I can’ t go back and change i t, but i t’s in the past.
The reality is I w as just a kid— I had no abi lity to fight m y brother of f. I
want to work on ac cepting this so I can l ive a heal thier l ife.
It wasn’t my fault. My par ents didn’ t protect me, but i t’s in the past and I’m
safe now; I w ant to work on let ting this go so I can mo ve on wi th my life.
Now it’s your turn: thinking of the situation you chose to work on first, write
some statements that will help you stop fighting and instead acknowledge reality
as it is:

Read these statements to yourself when the fighting reality thoughts arise,
as well as regularly (every day, if possible!), to strengthen this new way of
thinking.
Wrapping Up
In this chapter , you’ve had the opportuni ty to do some stage two work, begin to
get to know and communica te with your parts, and learn some skills to help you
work with them more effectively. I know this can be overwhelming—coming to
terms with your trauma through parts work and skills like acknowledging reality
typical ly takes a lot of energy. This is why the emphasis  is on going slowly and
taking a staged  approach to treating CPTSD so you have a road map to recovery.
Remember to go at your own pace and that trying to race to your destination will
not necessari ly get y ou ther e faster—or saf ely.
In the next chapter , we’ll start looking at another typical challenge for
individuals wi th CPT SD: relationships.
CHAPTER EIGHT .
The Importance of Connections
You’ve been learning a lot about yoursel f and how the traumas you’ve
experienced have contributed to the development of unheal thy patterns—such
as in the way you think about yoursel f, or the behaviors you use to cope, and in
your relationships (the f ocus of this chapter).
In chapter one, you learne d that one of the sympto ms of CPTSD is
difficulties in relationships or feeling close to others.  This often leads to
avoidance of relationships or developing relationships with dynamics similar to
those from past relationships—perhaps with abusiv e, controlling, or self-
absorbed others. Hopef ully, you’re beginning to understa nd the many reasons
for these difficulties: for instance, when you have a negativ e view of yoursel f, it’s
hard to believe others could care for you; when you don’t feel safe with others,
it’s hard to let your guard down enough to form deep connections; or when the
people closest to you have betrayed you, it’s hard to trust this won’t happen
again in f uture.
In this chapter , we’ll look at the importance of having connections with
others and you’ll have the opportuni ty to consider the relationships currently in
your life, how healthy they are, and whether you need to increase connections
with others. We’ll also look at what it means to have healthy limits and I’ll
provide you with some tools to help you observ e those limits, including skills for
assertiv e communication and consider ations for ending unheal thy relationships.
These skills are not only often involved in stage three work but are also helpful
in incr easing saf ety and stabi lity in stage one.
The Importance of Connections
Human beings are social creatures and are not meant to be alone. In fact, one
study that looked at the consequences of loneliness and isolation found that a
lack of social connection carried health risks similar to smoking fifteen cigarettes a
day (Holt-Luns tad et al. 2015). In other words, this doesn’ t just affect our
emotional heal th but our ph ysical heal th.
With that said, I’d invite you to consider the following question from your
wise mind: Do you think you have enough relationships in your life? Or is this
something that ’s missing f or you?
If you struggle d to answer this question, here’s an activity to help (based on
Van Dijk 2022).
Activity: Assessing Your Connections
Write the names of the people to whom y ou feel closest. (It doesn’ t matter how
often y ou see or talk to these people, just consider how close y ou feel to them. )
When y ou want to spend qual ity time wi th someone, who comes to mind? List
everyone y ou can think of:
If you want to get out of the house and do something—catch a mo vie, go f or
coffee, tak e a w alk—who can y ou cal l to keep y ou compan y?
If you’re feeling troubled, ha ve a pr oblem y ou’re struggl ing wi th, or ar e in crisis,
who ar e you comf ortable talking to?
Are ther e any groups y ou belong to thr ough which y ou feel supported (l ike a
support gr oup or a spiri tual or r eligious gr oup)?

Imagine y oursel f in crisis or struggl ing wi th intense emotions. If y ou ha ve a go-to
person (l ike a partner , parent, or best f riend), imagine that person isn’ t available f or
some r eason. Who could y ou turn to instead?
Now imagine that person isn’ t available. Who else could y ou turn to?
Take a moment to r eview y our answers. Does an ything stand out? Consider that
question once mor e from your wise mind—do y ou think y ou ha ve enough
relationships in y our life, or is this something that ’s missing? W rite your thoughts
here:
While everyone has different needs when it comes to connections with others,
everyone does have these needs. As adult human beings, we can surviv e on our
own, of course, but we thriv e when we’r e part of a communi ty.
Increasing Connections
You might not have found answering the previous question difficult, but doing
something about it is often easier said than done. If you recogniz e you need more
relationships, her e are some ideas to consider .
Reconnecting
Consider people from your past with whom you could reconnect —people
who are at least relatively emotional ly healthy, that is! A friend from high school?
An old neighbor? Even if you had a falling out with someone, it may be less
compl icated (and less scary) for you to attempt to restart that relationship . Write
the names of people or an y other thoughts y ou ha ve here:
Strengthening Current Relationships
If reconnecting  with others isn’t an option, consider people currently in your
life with whom you might work on forming a deeper  connection: perhaps
cowork ers you’ve kept at arm’s length or the person you keep seeing in your
yoga class at whom you smile and say hello, but have never taken it further .
Look around you to see who has the potential to become someone more
meaningf ul in your life and consid er what your first step might be (like striking
up a conversation with the person in yoga or sitting with your cowork er on
break):
Creating New Connections
This tends to be the more difficult route as it typical ly involves putting
yoursel f into new situations with the goal of meeting people who could become
friends. Consider what new situations you might try: taking a pottery class,
taking up a sport, or doing some volunteer work. Write any ideas that come to
mind her e:
Whatev er activity you choose, the important thing is to make sure you look
up—mak e eye contact with others. Smile. Do your best to be approachable and
perhaps ev en push y oursel f to appr oach someone else and be f riendly .
As you push yoursel f outside  of your comfort zone, there are some things
you’ll need to keep in mind: some of your parts might not like this—f or instance,
it might not feel safe. You might find yoursel f in your yellow zone as your ANS
detects signals  of danger in environments that are unfamiliar and around people
you don’t know. Anxiet y makes sense, so be sure to use the skills you’ve been
learning to help with this. Our discussion in the next section regarding observing
limits will also be helpf ul her e.
Observing Limits
In DBT, observing limits (also referred to as boundaries ) is the process of noticing
whether someo ne’s behavior is acceptable to you. Allowing someone to continue
to behave toward you in ways you experience as unacceptable will usually result
in feelings of resentment or burnout in the relationship . Here are some examples
to get y ou thinking about y our own l imits:
Matthew w as out f or dinner wi th his f riend Liam. They wer e catching up
and enjo ying themselv es when Liam made a dispar aging comment about
their w aiter. Matthew w as stunned but, not knowing how to r espond, said
nothing.
Petra’s sister Mol ly was unhapp y in her r elationship . Petra tried to be ther e
to support Mol ly, but she r efused to ev en try to mak e changes wi th her
partner —she wouldn’ t talk to them about her unhappiness and she thought
couples ther apy was “a w aste of time. ” Petra was sick of Mol ly just
complaining al l the time and not trying to change her si tuation and came to
dread spending time wi th Mol ly, something she used to look f orward to.
Terrence lo ved his job working as a v et assistant, but he f elt like his f riend
Maia took adv antage of him b y bringing her dogs f or a “visi t” on week ends
so he could trim their nai ls. This f elt like an intrusion on T errence’s time
and he f ound himsel f growing r esentf ul.
As you read these stories, do your own experiences come to mind? You
might already be aware of some limits you struggle to observ e (or perhaps you
don’t struggle at all, which is great!). Keep in mind that if you have CPTSD, it’s
not unusual to be unaware of your limits, to feel like you’re not allowed to have
wants or needs in relationships with others, or to struggle  to communicate your
limits to others. If this is a problem for you, consider times when you’ve found
yoursel f judging someone’ s behavior or perhaps you’ve noticed feeling angry (or
frustrated, irritated, resentf ul, and so on) in response to their behavior. Can you
identi fy what the limit was that you weren’t observing? Write your thoughts
here:

The first step in observing limits is becoming aware that something isn’t
okay for you; your emotions will often be a good indicator of this: notice
resentment and other emotions on the anger spectrum (and yes, mindf ulness
will help with this!). Then, do your best not to judge and not assume the other
person knows their behavior is problematic for you. Everyone has different limits,
and these can also change depending on circumstances. You may not even be
aware of a certain limit until you experience it being pushed, so how can you
expect others to know what your limits are? What’s important is that you learn
to notice when it happens and then observ e the limit by assertiv ely
communicating it to the other person. Let’s return to our earlier examples to
demonstr ate.
Matthew v alued his f riendship wi th Liam, but decided he didn’ t want to
continue the f riendship i f Liam’ s beha vior didn’ t change. He cal led Liam and
told him how he f elt and ask ed if Liam w as willing to work on changing his
behavior so they could r emain f riends.
Petra told Mol ly she lo ved her and w anted to support her and shar ed how
difficult it was to l isten to her v ent wi thout trying to change her si tuation.
She set a l imit with Mol ly that, f rom now on when they wer e together , she
could v ent for five minutes bef ore Petra would change the topic.
Terrence decided to let Maia know that, to impr ove his sel f-care, he w as
going to start l imiting the amount of work he did outside of his actual work
hours. He w as still willing to help her , but i t would ha ve to be on his
schedule, not hers.
Once you’ve identi fied a limit you need to observ e, the next step is
communicating it to others. Easier said than done, I know, especial ly if you’ve
learned it’s not safe to express your needs and wants, that others’ needs take
priority over yours, or other simi lar things. This is wher e assertiv eness comes in.
The Importance of Healthy
Communication
Being unable to communicate  effectively is one of the most common relationship
problems. With a history of complex trauma, this may be related to parts
becoming activated with intense emotions like anxiet y (What if they leave because
I’m asking for too much? ) or shame (I don’t deserv e to ask for this or I’m selfish).
It may be because you’ve never learned the skills to communicate assertiv ely—
perhaps because caregivers didn’t have these skills themselv es or because it was
safer not to communicate physical and emotional needs. It could also be related
to an inability to recogniz e that you have an unmet need, also not uncommon in
CPTSD. Whatev er the reason for difficulties in communication, the results are the
same: your wants and needs remain unattended to, likely resulting in heightened
emotions over time, increasing the likelihood of problematic behaviors—these
might be avoidance behaviors such as substance use or self-harm, or they may be
directed at the other person (l ike lashing out), which damage the r elationship .
Rather than continue to fall into this pattern, howev er, you can choose to
start working on heal thy communication.
Assertiveness: What It Is and What Gets
in the Wa y
Being assertiv e means clearly expressing yoursel f in a way that’s respectf ul of
yoursel f as well as others. Assertiv eness involves caring about the other person
and their needs, trying to see their perspectiv e, and negotiating and
compr omising in an at tempt to meet their needs as wel l as your own.
I mentioned earlier that people sometimes struggle with assertiv eness
because they don’t feel deserving of having their needs met, or of saying no to
the requests of others (individuals who experienced abuse or neglect in
childhood have often been trained to believe their needs don’t matter); negativ e
self-perceptions (such as I’m worthless ) may also contribute to this. But
asserting yourself will gradual ly lead to feelings of self-respect and self-esteem—
by acting as though  you’re deserving, you’ll start to believe you are deserving.
Being assertiv e will also improve your relationships, which  will contribute to you
feeling bet ter about y oursel f.
How to Be Assertive
The first step in being assertiv e is deciding from your wise mind what your goals
are. If you’re not clear on what you’d like from the interaction, you’ll struggle to
communicate this to others. Let ’s look at Mat thew as an example.
Matthew’s Goal
Matthew r ealized that Liam’ s beha vior at dinner went against his v alue of
treating others r espectf ully, as he would w ant to be tr eated. His first
thought w as that he shouldn’ t be f riends wi th Liam—he didn’ t want to
associate wi th someone who would tr eat others that w ay. But as
Matthew consider ed this, he w as able to ac cess his wise mind and
realized his ini tial reaction w as emotion-minded, coming f rom a y ounger
part that had dev eloped when he w as being bul lied in school. That part
thought Liam w as bad and w anted to cut him out of Mat thew’s life. From
his wise sel f, howev er, Matthew acknowledged ther e wer e man y qual ities
he liked about Liam—that ’s why they had been f riends f or such a long
time. Mat thew decided, instead of cut ting Liam of f (which w as something
he would ha ve done in the past), he would tel l him how he f elt about his
behavior and ask him to mak e a change.
The following are some DBT skills to help you be assertiv e (Linehan 2014).
I’ll outline the skills first, then we’ll use Matthew as an example of how to put
them into pr actice.
Describe the situation: Begin by describing the situation you want to discuss,
sticking to the facts, and staying away from judgments and blaming. Think of
this as tel ling the other person what the con versation is about.
Describe thoughts and emotions: Describe your thoughts and emotions
about the situation (emotions are optional if it doesn’ t seem appropriate—f or
example, if the conversatio n is with your boss). Using “I” statements (for
example, I felt angry when you said that) can be helpful and make it less likely
that others wi ll become def ensive.
Clearly state what you want: Be specific about what you’re asking for. This is
where it’s important to be certain of your goals so you can be clear about your
request. R emember that others can’ t read y our mind!
Reinforce: It’s helpful if you can think of something the other person will get
out of giving you what you’re asking for. This is meant to motiv ate others to
want to help as they see it’s not all about you but that you’re willing to give in
order to get.
Let’s look at how Matthew used these skills to have a conversation with
Liam.
Describe the situation: When we were at dinner last weekend, you made a
disrespectful comment about our waiter .
Describe thoughts and emotions: I found your comment offensive, and I felt
angry .
Clearly state what you want: When we’re together , I’d like you to be respectful
of others and not to share your judgmental thoughts about them with me.
Reinforce: This will help me be more comfortable when we get together and will
allow us to remain friends.
Now it’s your turn. Think of a conversation you’d like (or need) to have with
someone. This could be anything: asking your cell phone provider to change
your plan, asking your best friend to change your weekend plans, or asking your
partner to help you with an errand. In the space provided, write out your script.
Tip: You can also use these skills to say no to a request someone is making of
you. You might not need to include all the steps we’ve just looked at, but when
saying no, it can be helpful to state your thoughts and emotions and to clearly
state what y ou want—in this case, to sa y no.
Activity: Communicating Assertively
Describe the situation:
Describe thoughts and emotions:
Clearly state what you want:

Reinforce:
I’d strongly recommend you rehearse your script once you’ve written it; of
course, you can’t script an entire conversation with someone as you can’t be
certain of their responses but rehearsing how you’d like to start the conversation
will build your confidence in these new skills. If it feels too hard to have the
conversation right now, you might read the script to start (especial ly if it’s a
conversation with someone you’re close to, who knows about your CPTSD and the
work you’re doing). Over time, as you continue to practice, your confidence will
grow, and being assertiv e—like any skill—will start to come mor e natur ally to y ou.
Additional Skills for Assertiveness
These additional skills for assertiv eness will help you get your needs met and
make it more likely that you’ll maintain relationships and feel good about yoursel f
after y ou’ve been assertiv e (Linehan 2014).
Mindfulness
I often hear people refer to themselv es as “confl ict avoidant, ” they avoid
having difficult conversations with people in their life, often out of fear of losing
the person or damaging the relationship . I remind my clients that, right now, it’s
a conversation, not a conflict. The “confl ict” is the imagina ry scenario you’ve
created in your mind—i t’s not reality; remembering this will help reduce your
anxiet y.
Being mindful in interactions  is also typical ly experienced as validating for
others, as it communicates that you’re paying attention  and are interested in
them and the conversation. Eliminate distractions: put down your phone, turn off
the TV, and give the person your full attention. As best as you can, focus on
what they’re saying (rather than, for instance, what your response will be), ask
questions, and be interested in their answers. While you might find this difficult
for a variety of reasons (like, connecting with others is scary!), it typical ly goes a
long way in improving relatio nships— and remember how important it is to have
connections wi th others.
Validating Others
In chapter six, you learned the skill of self-validation and I’ve mentioned the
importance of validating your parts as well. See if you can bring to mind a time
when someone validated you: can you recall how it felt? Usual ly, it’s soothing or
calming to be understood and accepted; it brings down the intensi ty of
emotions. It can also help increase our sense of conne ction with the person
we’re validating. This is how validation helps in our relationships with others
(and keep in mind that validating others doesn’ t necessari ly mean that you agree
with or l ike what y ou’re validating!).
Be Genuine and Use Humor
Being assertiv e doesn’ t necessari ly mean you have to be all serious. If it’s
appropriate, lightening the mood of an important or difficult conversation by
using humor , smiling, and laughing can help reduce tension, improving the
likelihood of a posi tive outcome.
And if you haven’t yet notice d, all the skills we’ve discus sed so far in this
chapter can also improve relationships within your self-system, so you can be
thinking not just about using these skills with the people around you but with
your parts!
What to Do About Unhealthy Relationships
People with CPTSD commonly find themselv es in unheal thy relationships—perhaps
with those who are abusiv e or neglectf ul or maybe just with others who are
emotional ly unheal thy and with whom they’ve developed unheal thy patterns (such
as having an imbalanced relationship where one person enables the other’s self-
destructiv e behaviors). Part of the problem if you have a history of trauma—
especial ly if this involved childhood trauma—is that you likely didn’t have many
examples of healthy relationships and you didn’t learn to detect the red flags
others might see when they ha ven’t grown up wi th abuse.
Before we look at how to end unheal thy relationships, let’s look at some of
the things that might indicate a r elationship is actual ly unheal thy.
Red Flags
While I can’t provide an exhaustiv e list of the things to be on the lookout for
in your friendships or romantic relationships, here are some things you can
consider:
Physical abuse:  If someone is ph ysical ly aggr essive tow ard you—hi tting,
kicking, pushing, or an y other kind of ph ysical contact; or thr eatening to do
any of these things—this is a ph ysical ly abusiv e situation. It ’s not saf e.
Sexual abuse:  No one has the right to ph ysical ly force you, or emotional ly
coerce you, to ha ve any kind of sexual contact wi th them. This is abuse.
Emotional abuse  is an y act that detr acts f rom your sense of identi ty,
dignity, and sel f-worth. Examples include v erbal abuse: name-cal ling,
threatening, or y elling; at tempts to contr ol, isolate, or moni tor a person’ s
behavior; or humi liating or shaming a person. F eeling af raid of someone or
walking on eggshel ls are indicators that y ou ma y be in an abusiv e
relationship .
Dishonesty: If you disco ver someone hasn’ t been honest wi th you
(without good r eason), r ed flag. What ’s “a good r eason” though? I teach
my clients that sometimes i t mak es sense to choose to l ie from our wise
mind. If y ou’re on a first date wi th someone and they ask wh y it’s been so
long since y ou’ve been in a r elationship , you might not f eel comf ortable
sharing that y our last partner w as abusiv e, so i t mak es sense to tel l them
you’ve been priori tizing y our car eer. Or at a job interview , you’re not sur e if
it’s safe to shar e that y ou ha ve CPT SD and this has pr evented y ou from
working f or the last couple of y ears— I’d suggest i t’s okay to sa y you’re
between jobs trying to figur e out what y ou want to do . If you find out the
person y ou’ve just started dating l ied to y ou about being wi th their ex
because they thought y ou might get angry —that ’s not a good r eason to l ie.
Red flag.
Substance use:  If someone is misusing drugs or alcohol, this is a r ed flag
as it puts y ou in danger of man y of the other r ed flags, including abuse and
emotional disconnection. S omeone misusing substances is not l iving a
healthy lifestyle. R econsider y our in volvement.
These red flags are good cause to consider ending a relationship , which
we’ll look at shortly . But there may also be times when these red flags aren’t
present and the relationship  is problematic in other ways: perhaps you feel
unsatisfied and you’re beginning to realize your needs aren’t being met, you feel
stuck in the relationship out of a sense of obligation or misplaced loyalty, or
maybe you have very few relationships so you don’t want to lose this one. If a
relationship is important to you and it isn’t abusiv e or somehow destructiv e,
ending it should be a last resort: when you’ve used all of your skills, and nothing
is changing. Let ’s explor e important aspects of ending a r elationship .
Make a Wise Choice
Don’t let your parts make the choice for you—r emember to assume that any
intense emotion is a communication from a part, and if you make the decision
while you’re blended, you’re likely to regret that emotion-minded decision later.
You might choose to go to your meeting place where you can have a discussion
with your parts about this decision and all parts can weigh in, but the decision
should come from your wise self. Completing a cost-benefi t analysis from
chapter f our can also be helpf ul her e.
Safety First!
Remember that everyone has the right to be physical ly and emotional ly safe
and respected, so if you’re in a relationship (romantic, friendship , family, or
otherwise) in which you’re being abused in any way, you have the right—and
even owe it to yoursel f!—to leave. If you’re not sure how to do this or if you
need extra support around relationships gener ally, ask someone you trust for
help or cal l your local crisis l ine or shel ter.
Wrapping Up
Relationships can be difficult enough to navigate when you don’t have a history of
trauma— add CPTSD (often involving relational trauma) into the mix and it makes
sense y ou’ll struggle in this ar ea.
In this chapter , you’ve hopef ully started to learn more about why you have
the struggles you do in relationships, set some goals for yoursel f regarding the
connections (or lack of) in your life, and learn some skills that will help you work
toward your relationship goals. Remember , it makes sense that parts may be
trigger ed when  thinking about relationships and how to be more skillful in them,
so continue to work with those aspects of yoursel f; also remember that many of
the skills we’ve discussed in this chapter can actual ly be used with your parts to
enhance communication and cooper ation.
In the next chapter, we’ll discuss the importance of actively working to
increase posi tive experiences and pleasur able emotions in y our life.
CHAPTER NINE.
How to Increase the Pleasure in Your
Life
So far in this workbook, we’ve looked at different ways of understanding your
difficult experiences—such as dissociation, target behaviors, and problems in
relationships— and skills to help you manage the emotional pain related to
CPTSD. In this chapter , we’re going to switch gears and focus not on ways of
reducing the pain but on building more positive experiences in your life to
increase pleasur able emotions.
Focusing on the positive and increasing pleasur e in your life might sound
great, but once you start working on it, you might find you struggle with this (or
parts of you do!), especial ly if you’re in stage one of your trauma treatment
journey . That may sound strange, but when you’ve experienced prolonged
periods of not being safe, times of calm, peace, and contentment can feel
uncomf ortable or even frightening. You’ve become accustomed to living in the
yellow and red zones, or your parts get used to constantly being on guard in
order to keep you safe. So, if you notice you struggle with this chapter , rest
assured, this isn’t uncommon. And as I’ve said so many times already, take all
the time you need and be patient with yoursel f as you do this work. If you’ve
done trauma resolution work, the skills we’ll be looking at here will help with
your stage three (integr ation) work; otherwise, these can also be helpful in
stage one.
To ease you in, let’s start with a skill you’ve already learned and are
hopef ully practicing: mindf ulness.
Be Mindful of the Positives
It can be easy to overlook pleasur able feelings that arise, such as calm, peace, or
contentment, since they’re not as intense as the pain you may be used to
experiencing or if they’re fleeting moments of pleasur e. When life is chaotic and
busy, or when you’re experiencing intense emotions regularly , it can be hard to
even notice the roses, never mind remember to stop and smell them! Think about
moments in your life that might give you some kind of little pleasur e if you could
only see it: your dog greeting you at the door with excitement and uncondi tional
love, looking out your window at the snow quietly falling, the sun shining, or
hugging someone y ou car e about.
Practicing mindfulness will help you notice the pleasur e in your life, even
when it’s there for just a short time, or when the emotio n isn’t an intense one
like happiness or joy. Slowing yoursel f down and noticing these moments will not
only help you increase the pleasure you experience in life but will also lead to an
increased sense of wel l-being.
Activities to Increase Pleasurable
Emotions
First, let’s clarify what I mean by pleasur e. If you haven’t experienced emotions
like happiness or joy very often in your life, or if it’s been a long time since you’ve
felt these emotions, it might be unrealistic to expect to experience these emotions
in the short term. To help you think more broadly, consider the following list of
pleasur able emotions.
Calm Peacef ul Soothed Content
Satisfied Relaxed Gratified Comfortable
Restful Proud Enjoyment Amused
Safe Appreciativ eInterest Curious
If there are other words that describe pleasur e for you, write them in the
blanks:

It can also be helpful to know that you might experience a pleasur able
emotion combi ned with an uncomf ortable (or even distressing) emotion, such as
feeling anxiou s while you’re enjoying yoursel f, or feeling dread about the
happiness you’re experiencing (that idea of foreboding  joy we discussed in
chapter five). This often makes perfect sense in the context of CPTSD: for
example, it might not have been safe to express any emotion with an abusiv e
caregiver, or perhaps a negativ e self-view causes you to question if you’re
deserving of feeling pleasur e. Whatev er the cause of your difficulty with the
pleasur able emotion, mindf ulness will help you come back to the present
moment and allow yoursel f to be with the pleasur able emotion with your full
attention, and with acceptance. As you continue to practice this, over time, you
should notice that y our discomf ort wi th experiencing pleasur e decr eases.
To help you be mindf ul of those pleasur able emotions, howev er, you first
have to find ways of gener ating them! Following is a list of activities that change
our body chemistry to help us feel some kind of pleasur e. Since everyone’s
experience of these activities will be different, I’d invite you to try each of these
to find which ones work best f or you.
Be in nature.  Just twent y minutes of being in nature can significantly  reduce
stress. A study by Beil and Hanes (2013) compar ed one group of people sitting
in a city park with no trees to a second group who sat in the woods; they found
that the group exposed to nature reported significant ly less stress and an
eightf old decrease in a biological marker of stress known as salivary alpha-
amylase.
Activate your vagus nerv e. As you learned in chapter three, activating the
vagus nerve helps to bring you into the green zone, where you’ll be more able to
connect with others, mindf ully engage in the present moment, and get to a
calmer state. Remember that the vagus nerve is connect ed to our vocal cords,
so humming, chanting a mantra, gargling, laughing, or singing can also help
gener ate pleasur able emotions.
Singing with others has the additional benefi t of gener ating oxytocin— also
known as the “love hormone”—because it helps us feel more connected to
others. Oxytoc in also helps calm the amygdala, the part of the brain that’s
primari ly involved in the processing of emotions and memories associated with
fear, and tempor arily prevents the r elease of str ess hormones.
Touch (hugging, holding hands with others, even petting your dog, cat, or
guinea pig) also releases oxytocin and reduces stress and feelings of loneliness.
And laughing with others also has added benefi ts in reducing stress and
increasing pleasur e, so here’s a reminder of the importance of connecting with
others!
Listen to music.  Resear ch has found that another chemical called dopamine—
known as the “feel-good neurotransmi tter”—is released in the brain when we
listen to music we enjoy, so put on your favorite tunes. And singing along will
further enhance y our enjo yment as y ou stimulate y our vagus nerv e!
These are activities that change your body chemistry in some way to help
you experience  pleasur able emotions, but these are just a starting point. Let’s
look at what other activi ties you can do to incr ease pleasur e in y our life.
Activity: Experimenting with Pleasurable
Activities
Many people with CPTSD didn’t have the opportuni ty as children to explor e
different activities to learn what they like and dislike. Or, if your CPTSD is related to
adult trauma, you might feel like you’ve lost yoursel f and no longer have a sense of
what brings you enjoyment. Either way, I think of this as an experiment you have
to do now: to figur e out what wi ll bring y ou pleasur e.
Start by listing  any (healthy) activities you’ve done in the past that gener ated
some kind of pleasur able emotions. Remember , we might not be talking
“enjoyment ” or “fun” but perhaps calm, content, relaxed, at peace, curious, and so
on:
If you’re having difficulties, I’d invite you to return to the list of activities from
chapter four to help you brainstorm about what might be pleasur able for you. As
you read through the list, put a check beside any activities you’d be willing to try
and think about how y ou might modi fy these activi ties to sui t you bet ter.
If you’re still struggl ing to think of activities to try, consider anything that’s
ever appealed to you; keep in mind that you’re just brainstorming right now, so the
sky’s the limit! For example, maybe you saw a show about scuba diving and that
caught your interest—write it down. Or perhaps you have a friend who plays a
sport that sounds fun—add it to the list. Ask family and friends for suggestions or
Google “fun things to do” or “enjoyable activities” and get some ideas to add to
your list.
Add an ything else y ou can think of:
Once you’ve got your list, choose an activity to start with. You might find that
some things on your list aren’t realistic in the short term—ma ybe scuba diving is
too expensiv e for you right now. While starting a new hobby can be enjoyable,
planning for it can also give you pleasur e, so consider how you might be able to
work toward doing an activity that seems out of reach in the short term. For
example, start reading about scuba diving and marine life; find a local dive shop
where you can talk to people  about the sport; or work on improving your swimming
at the local pool. Saving up for an activity can also give you a sense of satisfaction,
and if you have someone you can share your adventure with, talking about the
activity and making plans together also gener ates pleasur e. Make some notes here
about which activi ty you’d l ike to try first (or work tow ard), and what y ou’ll do:

The next step is to get started and be mindf ul of the pleasur e you’ll
hopef ully notice arising. We’re not quite done with options for gener ating
pleasur able emotions, though.
Living by Your Values
A value is a core, fundamental belief or principle that helps us decide what’s
important and drives our attitudes and behaviors. Living  life according to your
values can help reduce painful emotions such as guilt and shame and will often
result in some kind of pleasur e as well, allowing you to live life more freely,
increase self-confidence, and provide a sense of satisfaction, peace, contentment,
or potential ly even happiness and joy at times. This can be difficult, howev er,
when you’ve experienced developmental trauma and you’ve been so busy
focusing on surviv al that you weren’t able to develop a sense of who you are and
what’s important to you. Or, if you’ve developed CPTSD as an adult, this can
cause you to lose sight of these things. Either way, doing some work to identi fy
your values will help you in the ways I’ve already describ ed, as well as by aiding
you in ac cessing y our wise mind.
Here are some  examples of values; circle the ones you identi fy with and add
any others that ar e important to y ou.
Authentici ty Achiev ement Adventure Autonom y
Balance Compassion Communi ty Creativity
Determination Faith Growth Honest y
Humor Justice Kindness Leadership
Loyalty Peace Respect Responsibi lity
Spirituality Stability Trustworthiness Wisdom

Of the values you’ve identi fied as important, put a check beside the ones
you believe you’re currently living your life according to and put an X beside
those areas that need attention. Keep these in mind for when we look at setting
goals, shortly .
Experiencing and expressing gratitude might also be a value for you; this is
one that comes wi th addi tional benefi ts.
Expressing Gratitude
Expressing gratitude—being thankf ul for someone or something—can also lead to,
and enhance our capaci ty for, pleasur able emotions. While the idea of developing
a gratitude practice has become a bit of a pop-cul ture cliché, it does have merit!
Resear ch has shown that gratitude contributes to our emotional health, increasing
well-being, resilience, compassion, and satisfaction in life; strengthens
relationships; and reduces stress and depression (Emmon s and McCul lough 2003;
Sheldon and L yubomirsky 2007).
There’s also evidence that gratitude can have positive effects on physical
health, including contributing to the prevention of cardiovascular disease through
changes in inflammation and functions of the ANS and other systems in the body
(Wang et al. 2023) and improving sleep quality (Wood et al. 2009). These
benefi ts for our physical health, of course, will contribute to improved mental
and emotional heal th, so this becomes a lo vely, heal thy cycle!
Gratitude often arises sponta neously , but as you can see, there are many
reasons to make it an intentional practice as well as to strengthen the brain’s
neural circuits for this emotion—in other words, the more we practice it
consciously , the more we’ll spontaneously be able to experience it. So, how do
you practice gratitude? The key is in noticing it (yep, mindf ulness once again),
and then finding w ays to expr ess it. Her e are some ideas:
Keep a gratitude  journal . Every day, write three things you’re grateful for. This
could be the fact that you have a roof over your head, that it didn’t rain on your
walk to work, or that y ou made i t out of the abusiv e situation y ou wer e living in.
Create a gratitude jar. A different spin on the gratitude journal, you can
create a gratitude jar (or box) where each day you write down one thing on a
piece of paper and put it into the jar; periodical ly, you can revisit your jar to
“count your blessings” and remind yoursel f of the things in life for which you’re
grateful.
Write a lette r of gratitude.  Write a letter to someone (you don’t necessari ly
have to send it!) expressing your gratitude to them for something they’ve done,
or for the effect they’ve had on your life. This could be someone from your
present or your past (it might even be someone who’s no longer alive). It might
be a friend or family member , a current or ex-partner , therapist, mentor , teacher ,
cowork er, or your pet. It could be someone you’ve never met, but who had a
profound impact on your life in some way. Again, it doesn’ t matter if you send
the let ter—what mat ters is that y ou expr ess your gr atitude.
Be mindful when someon e is thanking you, giving you a compliment,
or saying something else that makes you feel good. Notice if this is
difficult for you (this may be a part); if so, do your best to just notice the
emotions arisin g and validate the part of yoursel f that’s struggl ing to accept
what’s being offered. If this isn’t difficult for you (yay!), be mindf ul of this
experience.
Keep a gratitude photo journal. Every day, take a photogr aph of something
for which you’re grateful. You might choose to post it to social media to share
your gratitude with others—or you might not! What’s important is that you’re
making note of your feelings of gratitude in an intentional way. It’s also helpful
that you can go back and review those photos—this can become part of your
enjoyable activi ties pr actice as wel l!
I’ve given you lots of options here for gener ating pleasur able emotions, but
if you’re still struggl ing to think of activities that might give you some kind of
pleasur e, the next section on goal-set ting might also help .
Setting Goals
As with pleasur able activities, people with CPTSD can struggle with goal-set ting
for a number of reasons: perhaps you were too busy trying to surviv e the present
to think about the future, or it wasn’t safe to hope that you might even have a
future. If you’re in stage one of trauma treatment, you might need to look at
setting goals to help increase your stability. Or, if you’ve already done trauma
resolution work and you’ve moved into stage three (integr ation), this section will
help y ou consider what y ou’d l ike life after tr auma to look l ike.
Having goals not only gives us a direction in life but we also usually
experience a sense of pride in ourselv es when we reach a goal; having goals
gives us something to look forward to, even if we don’t achieve all of them. Not
having goals— a sense of who you’d like to be, where you’d like to be, what
you’d like to be doing, and so on—can leave you feeling unmoor ed and without
direction. Not having something you’re working toward can lead to a lack of
fulfillment and feeling stuck. So, what are your goals? Don’t worry if you’re not
sure; in the next activi ty, you’ll have the opportuni ty to consider this.
Activity: Considering Your Goals
Consider where you’d like to see yoursel f in the next six months, one year, five
years. What would you like for yoursel f? To be able to manage emotions more
effectively? Do stage two therapy to help you resolve your traumas? Live your life
according to your values? Go back to school to work toward a fulfilling career? Take
better care of your physical health? Eliminate certain unheal thy relationships from
your life? Remembering the sky is the limit, write down  any goals that come to
mind:
If you’re stuck, ask yoursel f the question, What would I do if I had six months
to live? If that was the case, what would you want to change in your life? This can
help put things into perspectiv e!
Once you’ve come up with some goals, choose one you’d like to start with—it
might be hard to choose just one, but working on more than one goal at a time can
be overwhelmi ng, so I would n’t advise it. Remember , you can come back to work
on the others later. It can also help to choose a less complex goal to start. When
you’ve decided  on one goal, break it down into smaller steps. For example, if my
goal is to ha ve heal thier r elationships, I might br eak it down into these steps:
1. Assess the relationships in my life currently: Are they balanced? Am I getting
my wants met? Am I happ y with the qual ity of them?
2. Make a list of the relationsh ips I want to change; choose one relationship to
start.
3. Ask myself: Is this an abusiv e relationship that I need to end or is it a
relationship that ’s important to me? Do I w ant to impr ove it?
4. If I want to keep the relationship , the next step is to ask myself: what needs to
change f or it to become heal thier?
5. Then I ask myself: what’s one thing I can do in the short term to start changing
the relationship ? (for example, have a conversation with the person about what
needs to change)
6. I then figure out what skills I need to use and make plans to implement that
first step .
In this exampl e, you see how I’ve taken a long-term goal and broken it down
into smaller steps that I can work toward in the short term. Now see if you can do
the same for the goal you’ve chosen to start with. Remember that if you’re
struggl ing, y ou can ask someone y ou trust f or help .
Wrapping Up
In this chapte r, we looked at some ways to gener ate pleasur able emotions by
creating more opportuni ties for positive events—changing the body’s chemistry ,
experimenting with activities that might be pleasur able, examining values,
practicing gratitude, and setting goals. Remember that managing the pain related
to your CPTSD isn’t enough— you also have to build a life worth living for yoursel f,
and part of this is finding w ays to experience pleasur e.
In the next chapter , we’ll revisit the idea of stage two work to help you
decide if you want to engage in trauma resolution therapy by looking at some of
the treatments currently being used to treat PTSD and, by extension, CPTSD so
you’ll be mor e prepared to mak e decisions ar ound this.
CHAPTER TEN.
Next Steps
My goal in this book has been to help you learn ways of managing your CPTSD
through unders tanding your symptoms and using skills. In this final chapter , we’ll
look at what your next steps might be on your journey to recovery, including
reevaluating where you are now and looking at some of the reasons you might
want to move into stage two treatment. We’ll also look at some consider ations
for working with a therapist and I’ll provide some information about several of
the commonly used tr eatments f or PT SD, and b y extension, CPT SD.
Considerations for Stage Two Treatment
While a unifying theme of trauma-f ocused therapies is revisiting the trauma, this
doesn’ t necess arily mean reexperiencing it, but it will involve getting in touch with
trauma-r elated emotions, thoughts, and beliefs that you have developed about
yoursel f and the world as a result of the trauma. Trauma resolution means being
able to integr ate the traumatic experiences into your life story, understanding that
this is an event that happened to you and that it happened in the past. It means
allowing yourself to grieve for what you’ve lost and learning to build a life worth
living despi te the tr aumas. Let ’s review some other benefi ts of doing this work.
Reducing Anxiety and Avoidance
You’ve learned previously that anxiet y and avoidance are symptoms of
CPTSD. This saps your energy and reduces the size of your world as you avoid
people, places, and things that remind you of the traumas in your attempts to
keep yoursel f safe. Engaging in stage two work can help you confront the
trauma memor ies and overcome your fears, allowing you to build a life worth
living that includes healthy coping skills and increased self-esteem and self-
confidence.
Challenging Negative Beliefs
Having negativ e beliefs about yoursel f (like I’m bad) is another common
symptom of CPTSD; beliefs such as these will typical ly increase painful emotions
such as shame and anger toward yoursel f. Trauma resolution will help you
change these beliefs and develop more balanced thinking (such as I was a child,
it wasn’t my fault), ther eby reducing those painf ul emotions.
Trauma also results in negativ e beliefs about others and the world quite
often, especial ly when the trauma has been relational in nature, as is so often
the case with CPTSD. These negativ e beliefs naturally result in an inability to feel
safe and make it difficult to trust others. Through trauma resolution work,
someone who developed the belief It’s not safe to trust gradual ly shifts this
belief to something more balanced, such as, I can learn to trust others and keep
myself safe. Shifts in perspectiv es such as these will go a long way in helping
you to expand your world, connect with others, and move forward from the
traumatic ev ents.
The Experience of Validation
People who have experience d trauma have often tried to tell others about
their experiences and have been met with denial, blame, minimization, or other
invalidating responses, which adds additional layers to the trauma they’ve
already experie nced. Therapy can provide a safe and accepting environment to
facilitate healing and growth. In addition, because CPTSD is so often the result
of trauma that is relational in nature, the therapeutic relationship provides an
opportuni ty for you to heal in the context of a healthy relationship , which is
often v ery helpf ul for people in their r ecovery from this kind of tr auma.
Let’s help you assess your readiness for stage two work before we move
into what y ou’ll need to know about choosing a ther apist.
What Stage Are You Ready for Now?
Recovering from trauma is a journey that you must take at your own pace. This
next activity isn’t about comparing yoursel f now to where you were when you
began reading this workboo k but it can be helpful to look at your roadmap
periodical ly to ensur e you’re going where you want to go. So, take some time to
go through the following questions to reassess what stage you’re in and help you
set goals f or wher e you’d l ike to go next.
Stage One: Safety and Stabilization
1. Have you been using ski lls to r educe or el iminate destabi lizing beha viors,
such as sel f-harming, suicidal beha viors, substance use, disor dered
eating, or other sel f-destructiv e beha viors? Mak e some notes about how
you’re doing wi th not acting on ur ges, what ski lls have been helpf ul, what
skills you need to work on using mor e, and so on:
1. Consider how y ou’re doing wi th using ski lls to manage emotions: do y ou
often f eel out of contr ol with emotions? F or example, lashing out at
others or ha ving panic at tacks or high anxiet y. Mak e some notes her e
about how y ou’re doing wi th using ski lls to help wi th this, what ski lls have
been helpf ul, which ones y ou need to work on using mor e, and so on:
1. If you dissociate, how do y ou feel you’re doing using ski lls to help r educe
this tendency? Mak e some notes about which ski lls have been helpf ul,
which ones y ou need to work on using mor e, and so on:
1. How ha ve you been working tow ard incr easing external stabi lity in y our
life? For example, changes in housing or finances; el iminating
relationships wi th others who ar e abusiv e; or r educing y our exposur e to
environments in which y ou experience bul lying, discrimination, or
harassment. Mak e some notes her e about what y ou sti ll need to work on
changing to incr ease y our stabi lity:

1. How ha ve you been doing wi th meeting y our basic heal th needs—f or
example, sleeping too much or too l ittle, eating too much or too l ittle, or
using drugs or alcohol in unheal thy ways? Mak e some notes her e about
what pr ogress you’ve made, and what y ou sti ll need to work on:
Review your answers and consider whether you think you need to continue
to work on increasing your stability before you’re ready to move to stage two.
One of the modifications that must usually be made to treatments for PTSD
when working with individual s with CPTSD is incorpor ating a longer stabilization
stage of treatment, so please don’t worry if you’re not there yet! Moving into
stage two before you’re ready can undo the work you’ve been doing. Keep
working on the skills you’ve been learning and be patien t with yoursel f. If you
find that dissociation is holding you back, or if you continue to have suicidal or
self-harming thoughts and ur ges, consider connecting wi th a ther apist.
If you’re thinking you might be ready for stage two, move on to the next set
of questions to determine i f this would be helpf ul.
Stage Two: Trauma Resolution
1. When y ou think of the tr auma y ou experienced, does i t feel like it’s still
happening on some lev el in the pr esent (ev en if you know logical ly it’s
not)?
1. Do you find y oursel f struggl ing in r elationships wi th others? F or example,
avoiding r elationships, often put ting others’ needs bef ore your own,
taking r esponsibi lity for others’ emotions, or worrying that people wi ll
leave you?
1. When y ou think of the tr auma, is ther e a sense of denial of the ev ent, or
imagining that i t happened to someone else?

1. When y ou think of the tr auma, do y ou find y oursel f thinking i t’s your fault,
or bel ieving i t means something negativ e about y ou as a person?
If you answer ed no to these questions, you may be well on your way to
recovery without engaging in stage two work, so feel free to move on to the
questions about stage three or you can consider the questions in the next
section. Remember that you now have skills and strategies to help you in stage
three (including parts work, reality acceptance, and increasing pleasur able
emotions and connections wi th others).
If you answer ed yes to any of these questions, you would likely benefi t from
stage two work. Keep in mind, howev er, that processing trauma is typical ly
difficult work involving intense emotions as memories are processed. Therefore,
ask yourself the following questions to help determine if you’re ready for stage
two:
1. What kind of support wi ll you need f rom others? (F or instance, help wi th
childcare or other r esponsibi lities? Addi tional emotional support?)
1. Who do y ou ha ve in y our life who wi ll support y ou whi le you’re doing this
work?
1. Are you in good ph ysical heal th? (F or example, i f you’re curr ently
under going medical testing f or unexplained symptoms, this can be
destabi lizing.)
1. Do you curr ently ha ve the time to commi t to doing this work? ( This wi ll
vary depending on what t ype of ther apy you’ll be doing, and the
homework r equired.)
1. Do you curr ently ha ve the financial means to commi t to the f ull course of
therapy?
If you’ve decided to move into stage two and you think you’re ready for it
based on your answers to these questions, be sure to continue using the skills
you’ve learned, to maintain or even increase your stability for the work to come.
If you’re moving to stage two, you can skip the following section and look at
consider ations f or trauma r esolution.
Stage Three: Integration
The following questions will give you a better sense of what you still need to
focus on in stage three. If you know you’re not yet ready for this stage, I’d
suggest you skip this part to avoid becoming overwhelmed thinking about the
work to come later; remember , these issues may naturally be resolved through
the work y ou do in tr auma r esolution.
1. Who ar e you now that the tr auma is no longer holding y ou back? What do
you want in y our life to mak e it mor e worth l iving?
1. What ar e your values and bel iefs? What ’s important to y ou in l ife?
1. What ar e your goals f or the f uture?

1. What giv es you a sense of f ulfillment in l ife?
1. Are you happ y with your curr ent relationships? Do y ou ha ve enough
people in y our life, and ar e these r elationships heal thy and satisf ying?
1. Are ther e relationships y ou need to look at ending? If so , do y ou ha ve the
skills to end them?
Hopef ully, you now have a clearer pictur e of what work you have left to do
in stage  three. Many of the skills in this workbook will help you work on these
goals, but i f you find y oursel f stuck, consider connecting wi th a ther apist.
In this final section, we’ll look at some things to consider if you’re planning
on moving into stage two. If you’re not ready for this yet, I’d suggest you put
the book aside f or the time being and continue to work on stage one work.
Considerations for Trauma Resolution
Many mental health clinicians are trained in the treatment of PTSD, but CPTSD is
typical ly much more complex, involving well-constructed defense mechanisms to
protect individu als from further pain. Therefore, it’s usually a good idea to look for
a ther apist who has experience wi th CPT SD.
Processing Trauma from Safety
Throughout this book, we’ve talked about the importance of developing
safety and stability in your life as necessary preparation for trauma resolution.
One reason for this is you must be able to maintain awareness of the present
moment and understand you’re safe in the here and now (in other words, your
wise self is in charge and you’re able to get to your green zone) for your entire
internal system to understa nd that the trauma is truly over (Fisher 2017).
Hopef ully, you’ve been doing the work in this book that will increase internal
stability (such as managing emotions; working on self-harming, suicidal, and
other target behaviors; and developing cooper ation between parts) as well as
external stability (such as eliminating unsaf e or abusiv e relationships and
observing your limits with others). But you must also feel safe enough  in a
therapeutic r elationship to do this t ype of work.
Gener ally, the quality of the relationship between therapist and client has a
moder ate influence on how well the therapy works (Meichenbaum 2017). In
other words, if you have a good relationship with your therapist, in which you
feel accepted and understood and you believe you can trust your therapist, you’ll
be more likely to benefi t from therapy. Since CPTSD often involves relational
trauma, it makes sense that trusting others may be one of the first challenges
you face when starting therapy. Working with a therapist who’s validating and
calm (and therefore able to help you coregulate) will gradual ly allow you to build
a sense of trust and will help you learn to feel safer. If you belong to the BIPOC
and/or LGBTQ+ communi ty, this means finding a therapist who’s knowledgeable
about the effects of oppression, discrimination, racism, and intergener ational
trauma, and how these experiences contribute to tr auma.
While you may not feel safe and able to trust your therapist right away (this
might make perfect sense given your trauma, as your parts work to protect you),
it’s important you feel comfortable enough to work on developing a relationship
with them. If your wise self doesn’ t feel understood, accepted, or believed by
your ther apist, find someone new to work wi th.
Of course, if you’re already working with a mental health professional, they
may be able to refer you to a special ist; if you’re a veteran, depending on where
you live, ther e may be or ganizations that of fer ther apy and r esour ces for PT SD.
Trauma Processing Therapies
Given that CPTSD is a newly defined condi tion, resear ch is limited but ongoing to
determine which therapeutic approaches will be most effective in treating it;
howev er, I’m certain the answer to this question will be it depen ds! Everyone is
different, with diverse types of traumatic experiences, so it makes sense that
different treatment modal ities (and lengths of treatment) will be required,
depending on individual circumstances and preferences. Until more resear ch
emerges, therapists are usually adapting evidence-based PTSD treatments for
CPTSD combined with an extended stabilization phase to improve your ability to
manage emotio ns, help you more accurately evaluate your thoughts, and increase
your capaci ty for sel f-compassion.
The other piece that may contribute to your choice of therapist is if you
prefer a specific treatment. In the next section, I’ll describe some of the
therapies commonly used to treat CPTSD, but please keep in mind that not all
treatments will be appropriate for all individuals. When you start working with an
effective trauma therapist, they’ll work with you to decide  which treatments will
be most l ikely to benefi t you.
Eye Movement Desensitization and
Reprocessing (EMDR) Therapy
EMDR therapy was developed by psychologist Francine Shapiro in 1987 to
help people heal from trauma and other distressing life experiences. The story
goes that, as she was walking in the park one day, thinking of a distressing
memory of her own, Shapir o realized that as her eyes shifted back and forth, the
painful emotion s associated with the memory decreased. She theoriz ed the eye
movements had a desensi tizing effect, and in a trial using horizontal eye
movements with individuals with PTSD, Shapir o found significant reductions in
distress and increased ratings of confidence in a positive belief associated with
the tr auma. Thus, EMDR ther apy was born!
It’s widely accepted that memories of traumatic events are not encoded in
our brains the same as nontraumatic memories. You’ll often hear traumatic
memories referred to as being unprocessed , frozen, or undigested , meaning
they’re unable to link up to other more adaptiv e information stored in the brain.
EMDR therapy is based on the idea that our brain naturally moves toward health
and healing: just as our body instinctiv ely knows how to heal itself when we get
a paper cut, our brain also has an adaptiv e information processing  (AIP) system
that helps us move toward psychological healing. And just as physical healing
can be compl icated at times—such as when the paper cut gets infected— and we
have to help our body heal by using an antibiotic ointment, our brain sometimes
needs a little help too. Occasional ly, something so extraordinary happens that
our system can’t process it, leading to a trauma response. EMDR therapy is the
antibiotic ointment that helps our brain do what it needs to heal: through use of
dual attention stimulus (DAS), such as eye movements or tapping (for instance,
on your shoulders or knees), traumatic material is linked to adaptiv e information,
which r educes and gr adual ly eliminates the ef fects of the tr auma.
EMDR therapy is a very structur ed therapy and requires very specific
training; be sure that the EMDR therapist you choose has a minimum of basic
training with an organization  accredited by the EMDR International Association
(EMDRIA).
Prolonged Exposure (PE) Therapy
PE is a treatment for PTSD that, as the name suggests, involves confronting
the source of your fear to reduce anxiet y around it. Psychologists Edna Foa and
Michael Kozak are the creators of this well-establ ished, evidence-based
treatment for PTSD. In 1986, they presented the theoretical framework behind
PE, Emotion Processing Theory , which posits that memories store our emotional
responses to the world. When we experience a traumatic event, new
connections are created in our minds, causing an anxiet y response to previously
neutral events, objects, people, or memories (triggers). According to this theory ,
PTSD symptoms are exagger ated fear responses to a traumatic memory;
avoidance of all the reminder s of the traumatic event reinforces these symptoms
and prevents us from having the opportuni ty to process the memory or learn
that the triggers ar e not actual ly threatening.
PE helps change our response to these anxiet y-provoking  triggers in a safe
and controlled manner through two methods: first, through imaginal exposur e,
where you revisit the trauma by recounting and imagining it; and second,
through in vivo exposur e, where you face the triggers that remind you of the
trauma. The goal of PE is habituation : when you jump into a cold lake, it feels
freezing at first, but after a few minutes, your body and brain habituate and it
doesn’ t feel as cold anymore. In the same way, gradual ly exposing yoursel f to
anxiet y-provoking triggers long enough allows your system to learn there’s
nothing danger ous or thr eatening, and the anxiet y isn’t warranted.
Cognitive Processing Therapy (CPT)
Drawing on cogni tive theory  and learning theory , CPT was developed by
psychologist Patricia Resick in 1988. According to CPT, our minds make sense of
the world by organizing the information we receive into mental frameworks
called schemas  (patterns of thoughts and behaviors based on memories and
experiences that guide our understanding of concepts, our behavior in specific
situations, and our view of ourselv es and others). Our schemas constantly
update as we learn new information and have new experiences. From a CPT
perspectiv e, healing from a traumatic event is hinder ed by the development of
stuck points in our schemas—extr eme, inaccurate thoughts such as The world is
unsaf e.
CPT helps us get unstuck by examining our negativ e thoughts and painful
emotions. Your therapist will help you identi fy and resolve these stuck points by
leading you through a series of questions designed to challenge their accuracy.
By the end of the process, most individuals adjust and update their schemas
with more balanced, helpful thoughts (such as Some things are unsaf e, but a lot
of people and places ar e safe), resulting in a r eduction of PT SD symptoms.
Somatic Experiencing (SE)
Created by psychologist Peter Levine in the 1970s, somatic experiencing
(SE) is based on the idea that traumatic memories are held in the body as well
as the mind, that emotions have a physical effect on the body, and that
emotions can resurface suddenly if you encounter a reminder of a trauma. From
an SE perspec tive, symptom s of PTSD are expressions of stress activation and
an incomplete defensive reaction to a traumatic event; through increasing
tolerance of body sensations and emotions and then inviting a dischar ge process
of the activation, symptoms will dissipate. Therapists must be certified in somatic
experiencing to provide this therapy, so be sure to look for this certification if
you’re inter ested in pursuing SE.
Internal Family Systems (IFS)
Developed by psychologist Richard Schwartz in the 1980s and similar to
ego-state theory mentioned in chapter seven, IFS is a psychother apy that
proposes multiplicity of the personal ity is a healthy, normativ e state. IFS takes
the stance that everyone has a core self (equiv alent to our DBT wise mind) as
well as different parts (just like a family consists of different family members)
that each have their own perspectiv es and emotions, and each wants what’s
best for the self. The goal of IFS is to help people access their core self and heal
their wounded  parts by changing the dynamics of the self-system (like an
internal f orm of f amily ther apy!).
IFS is a form of talk therapy in which, rather than focusing on memories,
you work with your therapist to identi fy and understand your parts (much like
we began to do in chapter seven). Some parts may be more affected by trauma
than others; the goal is to understand why some parts are hurting and learn to
help them and incr ease compassion tow ard them.
The following chart summari zes these therapies to help you decide which
therapy might be the best fit for you. Keep in mind that this is only a handf ul of
the man y options f or trauma pr ocessing.
Therapy DescriptionEvidence
for PTSDIs
homework
required?Requires
discussion
of
trauma?Can be
done
virtually?
EMDRA structur ed
therapy
involving
brief f ocus
on the
trauma
memory
while
experiencing
dual
attention
stimulus
(such as ey e
movements).Strong
evidence
for
reducing
symptoms
of PTSD
and
improving
functioning.No No Yes
PEA cogni tive-
behavioral
therapy
involving
repeated
exposur es to
the tr auma
memory and
triggers to
reduce
anxiet y
through
habituation.Strong
evidence
for
reducing
symptoms
of PTSD
and
improving
functioning.Yes Yes Yes
CPT A cogni tive-
behavioral
therapy that
involvesStrong
evidence
for
reducingYes No Yes
identi fying
and
challenging
maladaptiv e
thoughts
and bel iefs
about the
trauma, as
well as
writing and
reading a
narrative of
the tr auma.symptoms
of PTSD
and
improving
functioning.
Somatic
ExperiencingA ther apy
that f ocuses
on resolving
the
physiological
and
emotional
effects of
trauma b y
releasing
stored
energy in
the body
through
focusing on
movement
and
sensations.Limited
evidence
for
reducing
symptoms
of PTSD
and
improving
functioning.No No Yes
IFS A ther apy
that views
the mind as
composed of
different
parts that
have their
own
perspectiv es
andLimited
evidence
for
reducing
symptoms
of PTSD
and
improving
functioning.No No Yes
emotions;
helps the
client
understand
their parts
and learn to
access S elf
energy to
heal parts.
Wrapping Up
Recovery from CPTSD is a journey , and it’s different for everyone. But no matter
how long or intensely you’ve been struggl ing, remember that your symptoms
started as an adaptiv e response to help you surviv e. Your internal system (your
ANS, and your parts) has helped you get this far and I have every confidence that
you can continue this journey to find the l ife you deserv e—your life worth l iving.
My goals in this workbook have been to help you understand that your
experience makes sense and is understandable, given what you’ve been
through; to ensur e you know you’re not alone, and that there is hope; and to
provide you with the knowledge and tools to help you on this journey . I hope
that I’v e accompl ished those goals and I wish y ou saf e travels!
RESOURCES
Further Reading
Boon, S., K. Steele, and O. van der Hart. 2011. Coping with Trauma-Related Dissociation:
Skills Training for Patients and Therapists. New York: W. W. Norton.
Dana, D. 2021. Anchored: How to Befriend Your Nervous System Using Polyvagal Theory.
Louisville, CO: Sounds True.
Fisher, J. 2021. Transforming the Living Legacy of Trauma: A Workbook for Survivors and
Therapists. Eau Claire, WI: PESI.
Kabat-Zinn, J. 1994. Wherever You Go, There You Are: Mindfulness Meditation in Everyday
Life. New York: Hyperion.
Maté, G. 2004. When the Body Says No: The Cost of Hidden Stress. Toronto: Vintage
Canada.
Sapolsky, R. M. 1994. Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers: A Guide to Stress, Stress Related
Diseases, and Coping. New York: W. H. Freeman.
van der Kolk, B. A. 2014. The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, And Body in the Healing of
Trauma. New York: Penguin.
Williams, M., J. Teasdale, Z. Segal, and J. Kabat-Zinn. 2007. The Mindful Way Through
Depression: Freeing Yourself from Chronic Unhappiness. New York: Guilford Press.
Mindfulness Apps
Insight Timer: ht tps://insight timer.com
Smiling Mind: ht tps://www .smilingmind.com.au/smi ling-mind- app
UCLA Mindf ul: https://www .uclaheal th.org/mar c/ucla-mindf ul-app
Healthy Minds: ht tps://hminno vations.or g/medi tation- app
Associations
Eye Movement Desensi tization and Reprocessing International Association
(EMDRIA): ht tps://www .emdria.or g/about -emdr -therapy
International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation (ISSTD):
https://www .isst-d.org/publ ic-resour ces-home
REFERENCES
Beil, K., and D. Hanes. 2013. “The Influence of Urban Natural and Built Environments on
Physiological and Psychological Measures of Stress—A Pilot Study.” International Journal
of Environmental Research and Public Health 10(4): 1250–1267.
Bevans, K., A. Cerbone, and S. Overstreet. 2008. “Relations Between Recurrent Trauma
Exposure and Recent Life Stress and Salivary Cortisol Among Children.” Development and
Psychopathology 20(1): 257–272. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579408000126.
Bonaz, B., V. Sinniger, and S. Pellissier. 2017. “The Vagus Nerve in the Neuro-Immune Axis:
Implications in the Pathology of the Gastrointestinal Tract.” Frontiers in Immunology 8:
1452. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2017.01452.
Brown, B. 2012. Daring Greatly: How the Courage to Be Vulnerable Transforms the Way We
Live, Love, Parent, and Lead. New York: Gotham Books.
Cloitre, M., M. Shevlin, C. R. Brewin, J. I. Bisson, N. P. Roberts, A. Maercker, T. Karatzias, and
P. Hyland. 2018. “The International Trauma Questionnaire: Development of a Self-Report
Measure of ICD-11 PTSD and Complex PTSD.” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 138(6):
536–546. https://doi.org/10.1111/acps.12956.
Dana, D. 2018. The Polyvagal Theory in Therapy: Engaging the Rhythm of Regulation. New
York: W. W. Norton.
———. 2023. “A Beginner’s Guide to Polyvagal Theory.” Rhythm of Regulation. https://www
.rhythmofregulation.com/s/Deb-Danas-Beginners-Guide-mk82.pdf.
Emmons, R. A., and M. E. McCullough. 2003. “Counting Blessings Versus Burdens: An
Experimental Investigation of Gratitude and Subjective Well-Being in Daily Life.” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 84(2): 377–389.
Felitti, V. J., R. F. Anda, D. Nordenberg, D. F. Williamson, A. M. Spitz, V. Edwards, M. P. Koss,
and J. S. Marks. 1998. “Relationship of Childhood Abuse and Household Dysfunction to
Many of the Leading Causes of Death in Adults: The Adverse Childhood Experiences
(ACE) Study.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 14(4): 245–258.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0749 -3797(98)00017-8.
Fisher, J. 2017. Healing the Fragmented Selves of Trauma Survivors: Overcoming Internal
Self-Alienation. New York: Routledge.
———. 2019. “Sensorimotor Psychotherapy in the Treatment of Trauma.” Practice Innovations
4(3): 156–165.
Fraser, G. A. 1991. “The Dissociative Table Technique: A Strategy for Working with Ego States
in Dissociative Disorders and Ego-State Therapy.” Dissociation 4(4): 205–213.
Gold, S. 2008. “Benefits of a Contextual Approach to Understanding and Treating Complex
Trauma.” Journal of Trauma & Dissociation 9(2): 269–292.
Herman, J. 1992. Trauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence—From Domestic Abuse to
Political Terror. New York: Basic Books.
Holt-Lunstad, J., T. B. Smith, M. Baker, T. Harris, and D. Stephenson. 2015. “Loneliness and
Social Isolation as Risk Factors for Mortality: A Meta-Analytic Review.” Perspectives on
Psychological Science 10(2): 227–237.
International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation Task Force (ISSTDTS). 2023.
“EMDR Therapy Basic Training Manual, 2023–2024.” Course manual.
Kilpatrick, D. G., H. S. Resnick, M. E. Milanak, M. W. Miller, K. M. Keyes, and M. J. Friedman.
2013. “National Estimates of Exposure to Traumatic Events and PTSD Prevalence Using
DSM-IV and DSM-5 Criteria.” Journal of Traumatic Stress 26(5): 537–547.
Koenen, K., A. Ratanatharathorn, L. Ng, K. McLaughlin, E. Bromet, D. Stein, R. Kessler, et al.
2017. “Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in the World Mental Health Surveys.” Psychological
Medicine 47(13): 2260–2274. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717000708.
Linehan, M. M. 1993. Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder. New
York: Guilford Press.
———. 2014. DBT Skills Training Manual , 2nd ed. New York: Guilford Press.
Meichenbaum, D. 2017. The Evolution of Cognitive Behavior Therapy: A Personal and
Professional Journey with Don Meichenbaum. New York: Routledge.
Nijenhuis, E. R. S., and E. van der Hart. 2011. “Dissociation in Trauma: A New Definition and
Comparison with Previous Formulations.” Journal of Trauma & Dissociation 12(4): 416–
445.
Pachter, L. M., L. Lieberman, S. L. Bloom, and J. A. Fein. 2017. “Developing a Community-
Wide Initiative to Address Childhood Adversity and Toxic Stress: A Case Study of the
Philadelphia ACE Task Force.” Academic Pediatrics 17(7S): S130–S135.
Picci, G., N. Christopher-Hayes, N. Petro, B. Taylor, J. Eastman, M. Frenzel, Y. Wang, J.
Stephen, V. Calhoun, and T. Wilson. 2022. “Amygdala and Hippocampal Subregions
Mediate Outcomes Following Trauma During Typical Development: Evidence from High-
Resolution Structural MRI.” Neurobiology of Stress 18: 100456.
Porges, S. W. 1995. “Orienting in a Defensive World: Mammalian Modifications of Our
Evolutionary Heritage. A Polyvagal Theory.” Psychophysiology 32(4): 301–318.
Schwartz, A. 2016. The Complex PTSD Workbook: A Mind-Body Approach to Regaining
Emotional Control and Becoming Whole. New York: Althea Press.
Schwartz, R. C. 1995. Internal Family Systems Therapy. New York: Guilford Press.
Shapiro, F. 2018. Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR) Therapy: Basic
Principles, Protocols, and Procedures, 3rd ed. New York: Guilford Press.
Sheldon, K. M., and S. Lyubomirsky. 2007. “How to Increase and Sustain Positive Emotion:
The Effects of Expressing Gratitude and Visualizing Best Possible Selves.” Journal of
Positive Psychology 1(2): 73–82.
Siegel, D. J. 1999. The Developing Mind: Toward a Neurobiology of Interpersonal Experience.
New York: Guilford Press.
———. 2014. Brainstorm: The Power and Purpose of the Teenage Brain. New York: Jeremy P.
Tarcher/Penguin.
Siegel, D. J., and T. P. Bryson. 2011. The Whole-Brain Child: 12 Revolutionary Strategies to
Nurture Your Child’s Developing Mind. London: Bantam Books.
Telles, S., R. S. Mohapatra, and K. V. Naveen. 2005. “Heart Rate Variability Spectrum During
Vipassana Mindfulness Meditation.” Journal of Indian Psychology 23(2): 1–5.
US Department of Veterans Affairs. n.d. “How Common Is PTSD in Adults?” https://www.ptsd
.va.gov/understand/common/common_adults.asp.
van der Hart, O., E. R. S. Nijenhuis, and K. Steele. 2006. The Haunted Self: Structural
Dissociation and the Treatment of Chronic Traumatization. New York: W. W. Norton.
van der Kolk, B. A. 2005. “Developmental Trauma Disorder: Toward a Rational Diagnosis for
Children with Complex Trauma Histories.” Psychiatric Annals 35(5): 401–408. https://doi
.org/10.3928/00485713-20050501-06.
———. 2014. The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, and Body in the Healing of Trauma.
New York: Viking.
Van Dijk, S. 2013. DBT Made Simple: A Step-by-Step Guide to Dialectical Behavior Therapy.
Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.
———. 2022. The DBT Workbook for Emotional Relief: Fast-Acting Dialectical Behavior
Therapy Skills to Balance Out-of-Control Emotions and Find Calm Right Now. Oakland,
CA: New Harbinger Publications.
Walker, R. J. 2018. “Polyvagal Theory Chart of Trauma Response.” Southwest Trauma
Training.
Wang, X., and C. Song. 2023. “The Impact of Gratitude Interventions on Patients with
Cardiovascular Disease: A Systematic Review.” Frontiers in Psychology 14: 1243598.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1243598.
Watkins, J. G., and H. H. Watkins. 1997. Ego-States: Theory and Therapy. New York: W. W.
Norton.
Wood, A. M., S. Joseph, J. Lloyd, and S. Atkins. 2009. “Gratitude Influences Sleep Through
the Mechanism of Pre-Sleep Cognitions.” Journal of Psychosomatic Research 66(1): 43–
48.
Sheri Van Dijk, MSW , is a psy chother apist and r enowned dialectical beha vior
therapy (DB T) expert. She is author of man y books wi th New Harbinger ,
including Don’t Let Y our Emotions R un Your Li fe for Teens and The DB T
Workbook f or Emotional R elief. Her work has f ocused on using DB T skills to help
people manage their emotions and cul tivate lasting wel l-being. I n recent y ears,
Sheri has been special izing in complex tr auma.
Publisher’s Note
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the
subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering psychological, financial, legal, or other professional services. If expert assistance or
counseling is needed, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
NEW HARBINGER PUBLICATIONS is a registered trademark of New Harbinger Publications, Inc.


New Harbinger Publications is an employee-owned company.
Copyright © 2024 by Sheri Van Dijk New Harbinger Publications, Inc. 5720 Shattuck Avenue
Oakland, CA 94609 www.newharbinger.com
All Rights Reserved
Cover design by Amy Daniel
Acquired by Tesilya Hanaue r
Edited by Diedre Hammons






















