fpsyg-12-660753 May 20, 2021 Time: 13:22 # 1
PERSPECTIVE
published: 25 May 2021
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.660753
Edited by:
Isabel Fernandez,
Centro di Ricerca e Studi
in Psicotraumatologia (CRSP), Italy
Reviewed by:
Roger Solomon,
Buffalo Center for Trauma and Loss,
Williamsville, NY, United States
Dolores Mosquera,
Instituto de Investigación y
Tratamiento del Trauma y los
Trastornos de la Personalidad
(INTRA-TP), Spain
*Correspondence:
Michael Hase
m.hase@lzsm.de
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Psychology for Clinical Settings,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 29 January 2021
Accepted: 27 April 2021
Published: 25 May 2021
Citation:
Hase M (2021) The Structure
of EMDR Therapy: A Guide
for the Therapist.
Front. Psychol. 12:660753.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.660753
The Structure of EMDR Therapy: A
Guide for the Therapist
Michael Hase *
Lüneburger Zentrum für Stressmedizin, Lüneburg, Germany
Since the introduction of EMD by Dr. Shapiro in 1987, which led to the development of
EMDR Therapy, clinical experiences and research contributed to a variety of protocols
and procedures. While this dynamic evolution within EMDR Therapy is offering more
options to treat a variety of patients suffering from various disorders, there is a greater
risk of deviations from the core framework of this approach that would no longer be
understood as EMDR Therapy. While research shows that following Shapiro’s standard
protocols and procedural steps is important to achieve positive treatment effects, it
seems prudent to deﬁne the core elements in EMDR Therapy beyond adherence to
the standard protocol given the complexity of clinical demands in a variety of treatment
contexts. The author proposes that best practices requires not only an adherence to
the ﬁdelity of the model, but a willingness to adapt the model in order to best meet
the needs of our clients in a variety of clinical contexts. Deﬁning the core elements that
constitute EMDR Therapy offers both a structure that has been well established and
offers a foundation from which clinical adaptations can be made that are within the
realm of what is widely accepted as EMDR Therapy. Such a structure could also be
used to deﬁne research as well as clinical applications. Additionally EMDR Therapy as a
comprehensive psychotherapy approach implies that the therapeutic relationship is an
important component and should be considered a core element of this methodology.
Keywords: EMDR therapy, adaptive information processing, therapeutic relationship, case conceptualization,
research, AIP model, treatment planning, education
INTRODUCTION
Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing Therapy (EMDR) consists of a structured set of
protocols and procedures based on the adaptive information processing (AIP) model (Shapiro and
Laliotis, 2011). EMDR was introduced as EMD in 1987 (Shapiro, 1989) as a treatment for PTSD and
was developed into the comprehensive therapy approach named EMDR Therapy over the course
of time. Shapiro developed EMDR to be compatible with all major orientations to psychotherapy.
During the ﬁrst years the concept of the eight phases, describing a comprehensive EMDR
Therapy treatment, was developed. Even if the processing of inadequately processed and
maladaptively encoded memories remains the primary focus of EMDR Therapy, a number of
specialized protocols have been developed to address the needs of diﬀerent clients suﬀering from
a variety of disorders. For the scope of EMDR Therapy today see Valiente-Gomez et al. (2017).
Some reﬂections on the AIP model and theory of pathogenic memories contribute to the theoretical
foundation for the evolution of EMDR Therapy (Hase et al., 2017). An overview on the research on
working mechanism in EMDR Therapy was recently provided by Landin-Romero et al. (2018).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 May 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 660753
fpsyg-12-660753 May 20, 2021 Time: 13:22 # 2
Hase Structure of EMDR Therapy
The neurophysiology behind bilateral stimulation has been
researched to great extent (Pagani et al., 2017). Recently an animal
model of bilateral stimulation by Eye movements (EM) has been
described (Baek et al., 2019).
The theory currently used to explain EMDR Therapy
treatment eﬀects is called the AIP model. The AIP model, the
model of pathogenesis and change in EMDR Therapy, was
developed to explain the rapid change towards positive resolution
that is observed in EMDR memory reprocessing (Shapiro,
2001). AIP assumes “an inherent system in all of us that is
physiologically geared to process information to a state of mental
health” (Shapiro, 2002). “Information” as it is used here, refers
to external or internal input via all sensory systems, otherwise
referred to as experience. In EMDR Therapy it is presumed that
the neurophysiological activity of the AIP system in the brain
leads to a reduction in distress and/or negative emotions that
can be encoded1as a result of upsetting experiences, leading
to integration of upsetting information into a more adaptive,
positive state. The AIP system may be hindered or blocked by
trauma, severe levels of stress, or other variables like the inﬂuence
of psychoactive drugs (Hase et al., 2008).
Shapiro stressed the fact that the client should be suﬃciently
resourced before the therapist will engage the client in memory
reprocessing. In her textbook on EMDR Therapy 2nd edition,
Shapiro (2001) states: “For many of our clients, it appears
that simply reprocessing these earlier experiences allows the
appropriate cognitive and emotional connections to be made
and adaptive behaviors to spontaneously emerge, along with
insights and positive self-concepts” (p. 5). However, for clients
who have been badly neglected or abused in childhood, it is also
important to determine what developmental windows might have
closed before important infrastructures were set in place. Did the
traumatized child learn object constancy, or will it need to be
developed during therapy? What will the clinician have to model
for the client? What experiences will have to be engendered both
in and out of therapy to allow the needed introjects and patterns
to emerge? As these positive interactions are forged within the
therapeutic relationship, they are also stored in memory and
can be enhanced by EMDR procedures. In the 3rd edition of
her text, Shapiro (2018) again addresses these issues in a case
example of a rape victim: “After her clinician has eﬀectively
treated her client for a violent rape experience using EMDR
therapy procedures, the rape victim will be able to recall the rape
without feelings of fear and shame : : :.” On the following page,
Shapiro states, “ : : :Clinicians must understand how to prepare
clients appropriately and stay attuned to their individual needs
while keeping the information processing system activated so
learning can take place.” (p. 3).
Clinicians must also take a comprehensive history to identify
the appropriate targets for processing and the developmental
deﬁcits to be addressed. “In the current EMDR Basic Training
Manual Part One (Shapiro and Laliotis, 2017) this is put as:”
“Adaptive memory networks consist of associated memories that
are processed and integrated. They include negative experiences
1Shapiro used the term “stored.” As in science today the terminus technicus is
“encoded” this will be used in the text.that are resolved; i.e., the information is congruent with the
emotional response and are no longer disturbing. It also includes
positive life experiences (images, thoughts, feelings, physical
sensations, and beliefs), that, when accessed, can be strengthened
and enhanced through applying bilateral stimulation. Adaptive
memory networks need to be present and accessible for
reprocessing to occur. Therapeutic relationship is part of an
adaptive memory network.” Explaining reprocessing, the manual
states: “Accessing experiences (positive and negative) allows
for the linkages between consciousness and where information
is stored. Maladaptive/dysfunctional memory networks, when
accessed and reprocessed, link with existing positive, adaptive
memory networks.” The manual is very clear in instructions
to the clinician: “Determine availability of positive/adaptive
memory networks in order to proceed with memory processing.
Develop and strengthen positive memory networks as needed.”
Shapiro obviously conceptualized the AIP Model not only
as a model of the unprocessed but also as a model of
positive experiences or resources, needed to reprocess the
unprocessed. Interestingly Shapiro explicitly mentions the
therapeutic relationship in her textbook and even more explicitly
in the EMDR Basic Training Manual, but refrains from
describing the therapeutic relationship in EMDR Therapy in
more detail. The therapeutic relationship is an important
component of EMDR Therapy but diﬀers from the therapeutic
relationship in other psychotherapeutic approaches. Dworkin
(2005) introduced the relational perspective, but a description
of the special therapeutic relationship in EMDR Therapy is still
missing in the literature. It seems necessary to begin to elaborate
this topic by describing the therapeutic relationship as one of the
core elements of EMDR Therapy.
A HIERARCHY IN EMDR THERAPY
While the dynamic evolution of EMDR Therapy is oﬀering more
options to treat a variety of patients suﬀering from various
disorders, the risk of misunderstandings increase. As research
shows that following the treatment manual in EMDR Therapy
is important to achieve positive treatment eﬀects (Maxﬁeld and
Hyer, 2002), it’s also important to oﬀer a larger framework that
allows for clinical adaptations while adhering to the fundamental
precepts of this model. This article proposes six levels or
core elements of EMDR Therapy that are inherent to this
comprehensive treatment approach regardless of the diagnosis,
specialized protocols or context in which the treatment is being
administered. Assuming a hierarchy in EMDR Therapy could
contribute to more clarity. The ﬁrst level is constitutive for the
following levels, the second for the following and so forth. The
therapeutic relationship should be added as another core element.
THE FIRST LEVEL: THE ADAPTIVE
INFORMATION PROCESSING MODEL
The cornerstone of this treatment approach is the AIP model,
the model of pathogenesis and change within EMDR Therapy.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 May 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 660753
fpsyg-12-660753 May 20, 2021 Time: 13:22 # 3
Hase Structure of EMDR Therapy
This model proposes that our organism is naturally geared to
move towards health in the same way that when we get a
cut, our bodies respond in a way that promotes healing. When
a negative experience overwhelms the information processing
system of the brain, however, we are unable to process the
experience to resolution and the memory is maladaptively
encoded. These experiences that are unadequately processed
and maladaptively encoded generate symptoms and become
the focus of treatment. The AIP model guides our clinical
actions from the ﬁrst moments with a new patient until
termination of the EMDR Therapy treatment. The AIP model
informs our diagnostic procedures as well as our clinical actions.
As the AIP model is an information processing model, it
is important to have a comprehensive understanding of the
client’s life experiences both positive and negative, and their
access to adaptive information, often referred to as resources in
EMDR Therapy. It is important to understand, that experiences
which had a negative impact at the time of the event,
may become a resource when they have been processed and
are adaptively encoded. Understanding the client within the
AIP model informs our understanding of client readiness to
approach memory reprocessing, and the extent to which resource
enhancement or development is indicated as preparation for
memory reprocessing.
THE SECOND LEVEL: THE EIGHT
PHASES OF EMDR THERAPY
The second level in EMDR Therapy is constituted by the
eight phases of EMDR Therapy. The eight phases describe the
procedural steps as well as the course of treatment from the ﬁrst
moment to the last session. While they are referred to as phases,
there are not equal or sequential, as the phases are distributed
unevenly over the course of EMDR Therapy.
Phase1 (history taking) is the starting point of an EMDR
Therapy treatment. Of course, Phase 1 activities are focused on
gathering information contributing to an AIP informed case
conceptualization and treatment plan, making determination
about what memories and in which order will be targeted
for reprocessing. Phase 1 is also the starting point for the
emergent therapeutic relationship as well as the development
of a therapeutic alliance. The stance of an EMDR therapist is
non-judgmental, supportive, and understands the client’s clinical
complaints as driven by inadequately processed memories that
are being triggered by the client’s daily life demands. The
ability of the therapist to attune to the client, and titrate the
intensity of history taking to the clients aﬀect tolerance contribute
to success in Phase 1. With the typical PTSD or adjustment
disordered client, Phase 1 may be limited to a few sessions,
whereas the client who presents with a number of symptoms
over a broad context, who may display dissociative symptoms or
personality diﬃculties may be titrated over time. Typical Phase
1 procedures such as direct questioning (DQ), the Floatback
technique (FB), or Aﬀect Scan (AS) are applied for the purposes
of mapping out the memory network of experiences informing
the client’s current diﬃculties. In addition to these establishedprocedures, history taking is enhanced by observing indicators
of these inadequately processed and maladaptively encoded
memories in their state-speciﬁc form. For example, a client
who is coming for treatment due to severe anxiety becomes
visibly overwhelmed while trying to relate their experience. To
elaborate this brieﬂy some reﬂections on a memory or node
is necessary. The node in EMDR Therapy is the metaphor for
the inadequately processed and maladaptively encoded memory,
a memory network in itself as well as a portal into memory
networks (Shapiro, 2018). The node could contain all information
present at the moment of the event. This could be sensory
information, thoughts, emotions, as well as perceptions about
the present that are more informed by the past. Activation of a
node generates symptoms in the present that we often refer to as
being triggered. The past becomes present. In a psychodynamic
therapy setting they would be addressed as transference. In
EMDR Therapy transference is a symptom indicating activation
of a node, which oﬀers an invitation to explore the connection
between the client’s current reaction and the earlier event(s) that
are being activated.
Phase 2 (preparation/stabilization) is about determining
client readiness for processing. The EMDR model is explained,
and any concerns about the treatment are addressed. It also
includes establishing the mechanics of how the treatment will
be administered, to include the bilateral stimulation, seating
positions, as well as a stop signal in case the client needs
to stop during the processing itself. This is also the phase
where resourcing interventions are oﬀered as needed, even
if the use of resourcing interventions is not limited to this
phase and may be used over the whole course of treatment
especially with the complex client. The number of Phase 2
sessions necessary to prepare the client for subsequent memory
reprocessing diﬀers greatly from client to client. A positive
ﬁrst experience with bilateral stimulation, as well as with
the following ﬁrst reprocessing sessions seem to facilitate a
favorable outcome in the treatment of a PTSD patient in general
(Lee, 2006).
Phase 3, Assessment, involves accessing the Target memory
as it’s currently being experienced by the client and taking
baseline measurements of the sensory components of their
experience at the outset. During the reprocessing phases,
Phase 4–6, the Target Memory and associated linkages to
other memories are reprocessed. Fast bilateral stimulation is
used to activate the client’s inherent information processing
system for 20–30 s at a time with a brief check in to
ensure that the process is moving. Byproducts of reprocessing
such as insights, shifts in the client’s emotional response,
a new, more adaptive understanding of what happend in
the past, as well as assigning meaning to the experience
are indicators of the process moving towards resolution.
Phase 7, Closure, is designed to close down any session,
espeacially a reprocessing session, whether it lead to complete
or incomplete reprocessing of the target memory. Phase 8
is used to follow-up on every session. It takes place in
the subsequent session where the therapist is asking for
feedback on their experiences globally as well as evaluating the
Target Memory itself.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 May 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 660753
fpsyg-12-660753 May 20, 2021 Time: 13:22 # 4
Hase Structure of EMDR Therapy
THE THIRD LEVEL: THE PROTOCOLS
The sequence of memory reprocessing within the eight phases
of EMDR therapy can be organized according to a certain
protocol, a treatment plan. The protocols in EMDR Therapy
help the therapist determine a particular sequence in the
targeting of memories that are driving the client’s disturbance
in the present. The Standard, Three-pronged protocol of
EMDR Therapy outlines that past experiences are processed
initially as they are driving the client’s current symptoms.
Present triggers that have not been resolved by addressing
the past experiences are addressed, followed up by a Future
Template. The majority of published protocols follows the
sequence of the standard protocol and ads some adaptations
addressing the needs of a special population. The robust and
well researched sequence of the standard protocol guaranties
a safe and eﬃcacious treatment for the majority of clients.
Only the inverted standard protocol (Hofmann, 2009b) is
reversing the sequence addressing the future ﬁrst and slowly
moving back into the past. This protocol is considered a safe
alternative for the fragile, complex client. As any protocol is
applied within the framework of the eight phases, it is to
assume that preparatory and stabilizing work, Phase 2, is always
part of the treatment, even if this is not mentioned in a
certain protocol.
THE FOURTH LEVEL: THE
PROCEDURES
The procedures in EMDR Therapy are manualized approaches
to modify memories. These can be distinguished regarding
the type of memory addressed, as resource installation
procedures are applied to develop positive, resource memories
(Leeds, 2009), facilitate the access to such memories or
enhance resource memory networks. Till today a variety
of resource installation procedures have been described.
From the simple “Position of Power” by Popky, the more
sophisticated “Resource Development and Installation”
(Korn and Leeds, 2002) or more recent procedures like
“Instant Resource Installation (IRI)” or “extended Resource
Installation (xtRI)” (Hase, 2021), the variety seems to be
able to meet the needs of diﬀerent clients from childhood
to serenity. Speed of bilateral stimulation (BLS) in resource
installation procedures is in general slow. It has been shown,
that the slow BLS lead to a diﬀerent activity pattern in
the brain, then fast BLS. The pattern induced by slow BLS
is supposed to facilitate the access to positive memories
(Amano and Toichi, 2016).
An other group of procedures aims to reprocess or at least
modify the inadequately processed and maladaptively stored
memories. Speed of stimulation with these procedures is in
general fast, e.g., one movement per second. The reprocessing
phases 4–6 constitute the core memory reprocessing procedure
in EMDR Therapy with the ability for complete reprocessing of
the memory and highest associative power, during the course of
an EMDR Therapy treatment. Memory reprocessing procedureswith reduced associative power could be considered EMD and the
Four-Fields-Technique.
Another procedure will install the resource of present
orientation, using slow BLS, before exposition in sensu to
an unprocessed memory. The repeated to and fro between
resource installation and exposition in sensu can lead to partial
modiﬁcation of the memory accompanied by symptom reduction
or reduction in disturbance. This procedures is called CIPOS
(Knipe, 2008). This procedure could be considered as a “Bridge
Procedure, ” bridging the gap between pure resource installation
procedures and reprocessing procedures. CIPOS is often applied
in early stages of therapy like reducing the impact of trigger
experiences thus increasing client stability. It is important to keep
in mind that the application of CIPOS does lead to complete
memory reprocessing with the majority of cases. Recently the
Flash Technique (Manﬁeld et al., 2017) was introduced. It shows
some similarities but needs further research and evaluation
regarding the position in EMDR Therapy. Table 1 oﬀers an
overview on the procedures in EMDR Therapy regarding a
description of quality.
The therapist will often opt for phases 4–6 reprocessing
procedure as this is geared for complete memory reprocessing
and strong association into the memory network. But
considerating client stability, complexity or requirements of
the session the therapist could opt for another procedure to
initiate modiﬁcation of memory. Beginning with a procedure
leading only to symptom reduction, will more often lead to
subsequent application of phase 4–6 procedure and complete
reprocessing of target memory in subsequent sessions.
The compilation of procedures in this article is not
comprehensive and may be outdated at the time of publication
due to the speed of innovation in EMDR Therapy. Still it seems
suﬃcient to outline principles.
The procedures in EMDR Therapy relate somehow to the
Eight Phases. For instance diagnostic procedures like DQ,
ﬂoatback or AS are used in Phase 1 and ressource installation
often, but not exclusively, in Phase 2. Table 2 oﬀers an overview
on allocation of procedures to the eight Phases.
TABLE 1 | Procedures in EMDR therapy.
Description of Quality Procedure
Reprocessing procedures
High associative power Phase 4–6
Low associative power EMD, Four-ﬁelds
Bridging procedures CIPOS
Resourcing procedures PoP , RDI, IRI, xtRI : : :
TABLE 2 | Procedures in EMDR therapy related to the eight phases.
Phases Procedures
Phase 1 Direct questioning, ﬂoatback, affect scan
Phase 2 Resourcing
Phase 7 Resourcing; ﬂoatback, affect scan
Phase 8 Direct questioning, ﬂoatback, affect scan
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 May 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 660753
fpsyg-12-660753 May 20, 2021 Time: 13:22 # 5
Hase Structure of EMDR Therapy
THE FIFTH LEVEL: DUAL ATTENTION
BILATERAL STIMULATION
The alternating BLS, described by Shapiro as dual attention BLS,
in memory reprocessing or memory modiﬁcation procedures is
of great importance. EM are considered the primary form of BLS,
with the greatest impact on the information processing system.
Alternating bilateral tactile stimulation or auditory stimulation
are alternatives, which lack in impact as well as evidence in
science. One has to consider, that the majority of clinical studies
backing EMDR Therapy as an evidenced based treatment for
PTSD were using EM. The appropriate dosage, speed and rhythm
within resource installation and memory reprocessing is of great
importance. If the therapist is able to monitor the clients process
and adjust the BLS to the client’s needs, this contributes to
the safe environment and the special therapeutic relationship
in EMDR Therapy. This was described as neurophysiological
empathy by Hofmann (2009a).
THE SIXT ELEMENT: CLINICAL
INTERVENTIONS
Clinical interventions in EMDR Therapy are used to facilitate
processing if the client is blocked in processing or if the therapist
wants to add tracks of information to optimize treatment eﬀects.
Blocked processing is deﬁned as no change in the disturbing
material after two consecutive sets of BLS. There are also many
clinical situations where there is a reduction in distress but
limited resolution, due to missing information and/or skills,
and is in need of developmental repair for complete resolution
of the Target Memory. These interventions are referred to as
cognitive interweaves as they are clinician administered questions
or comments designed to mimic reprocessing eﬀects.
ANOTHER CORE ELEMENT: THE
THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP
The importance of the therapeutic relationship has been well
established in our profession. From the beginning, Shapiro refers
to the importance of the therapeutic relationship in her many
books and articles and even more explicitly in the EMDR Basic
Training Manual, Parts 1 and 2 (Shapiro and Laliotis, 2017).
Dworkin (2005) referred to the therapeutic relationship in his
book on the “relational imperative” describing the centrality
of the therapeutic relationship in EMDR Therapy from a
psychodynamic perspective.
According to the American Psychological Association, the
deﬁnition of evidence-based practice (ESB) both in the
United States and internationally includes a combination of the
best available research, the clinical expertise of the therapist,
and patient characteristics (Norcross and Lambert, 2011). It
stands to reason, therefore, that the therapeutic relationship is
a core element of EMDR Therapy as in all psychotherapies.
Research shows that the therapeutic relationship accounts for as
much of the treatment outcome as the method itself (Norcross
and Lambert, 2011). More speciﬁcally, the extent to which thetherapist is able to accommodate speciﬁc client preferences
related to culture, gender, race as well as religion and spiritually,
the greater the likelihood of a positive treatment outcome (Swift
et al., 2011). Moreover, when clients are asked to account for their
success in psychotherapy, over 90% of respondents described
their relationship with the therapist as primary (Norcross and
Lambert, 2011).
Clients often come for psychotherapy for self-esteem issues,
relationship problems and diﬃculties in self-regulation. These
complaints are rooted often in attachment-based experiences that
are formative in nature. It is understood that the process of
psychotherapy activates the attachment system due to the nature
of the therapeutic relationship. During memory processing for
example, it’s not just about what happened to the client; it’s
about what is happening in the moment to moment unfolding
of experience in the therapy room. This requires the therapist to
stay attuned to the client’s experience mostly through tracking
nonverbal gestures, co-regulating the client’s experience and
maintaining an empathic connection. EMDR therapists speak to
their clients, but more often, it’s about being in the resonance with
them (Siegel, 2010). We, as EMDR Therapists, keep eye contact,
while at the same time being in conncection without being
intrusive. Sometimes we even oﬀer touch. Most importantly, we
are in relationship to our clients and their experience in real
time; we perceive our clients’ signals, maintaining a mindful
presence, while responding promptly and appropriately to what
is needed. The inherent processing demands of EMDR Therapy
require a high level of safety and trust in the relationship
as well as in the process itself, in order for most clients to
be able to venture into the unchartered emotional territory
of their past traumas. Flores (2013) highlighted the need for
attachment as a lifelong need not limited to childhood, but as
part of all relationships throughout the lifespan. The therapeutic
relationship is no exception.
IMPLICATIONS FOR TRAINING,
CONSULTATION, PRACTICE AND
RESEARCH
The development of EMDR Therapy from a desensitization
technique to a comprehensive psychotherapy approach has many
implications for training, case consultation, clinical practice
and research. The development of protocols and procedures
not only enrich EMDR Therapy, but make it more complex
and sometimes confusing. Adhering to the basics of Shapiro’s
model and training curriculum is fundamental for for the future
of EMDR Therapy, yet at the same time, it will inevitably
continue to grow and develop. Deﬁning the core elements and
structure of EMDR Therapy allows for innovations as well as
new perspectives, such as a relational emphasis for attachment-
based trauma, could enrich AIP-informed case conceptualization,
treatment planning and even research.
From a training perspective, the established Basic Course
curriculum should be understood as foundational. However, for
most of us who have been teaching and practicing for many
years, this methodology is easy to learn, but hard to do. It takes
additional advanced trainings, ongoing case consultation well
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 May 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 660753
fpsyg-12-660753 May 20, 2021 Time: 13:22 # 6
Hase Structure of EMDR Therapy
beyond the minimum standards, as well as personal therapy in
order to fully understand and implement this approach.
Deﬁning the a structure, six levels in EMDR Therapy, allows
for innovation while staying true to the basic precepts and
procedures of the model. In addition, it oﬀers a structure that can
inform clinical choice points.
These structures will also inform clearer guidelines for
research. The reﬂections on the nature of the therapeutic
relationship in EMDR therapy, for example, could spark
new research, especially at a time where EMDR therapy in
the treatment of attachment disorders is gaining momentum
(Civilotti et al., 2019). The added emphasis on the therapeutic
relationship as another core element and attachment theory
(Brisch, 2015) could be an added incentive for the new trainee
in to embrace the protocols and procedures, rather than seeing
it as too mechanical and manualized. Perhaps an additional
focus of the experiential component of trainings could include
inviting the therapist to work on their own concerns about
the developing role as an EMDR therapist. The reﬂections on
the speciﬁc nature of the therapeutic relationship in EMDR
Therapy and the therapist’s capacity to, go there’can be part of the
training experience.
SUMMARY
The dynamic evolution of EMDR Therapy oﬀers extraordinary
opportunities for healing to clients suﬀering from various
symptoms and problems. The AIP Model is ideal to gain
understanding of a client’s pathogenesis in a non-pathologizing
way and reach out to the suﬀering human being, oﬀering
a comprehensive approach, which can be tailored to the
individual’s needs, whether it’s for symptom relief or for a
more comprehensive treatment. The AIP model as a theoreticalunderpinning should be emphasized for case conceptualization
as well as treatment planning, along with how to use the model
informs how and when we make adaptations to best meet the
needs of our clients.
Describing the structure in EMDR Therapy referring to six
levels, with the AIP model constituting the uppermost level
guiding case conceptualization as well as treatment in EMDR
therapy, down to the clinical interventions in processing, could
oﬀer more clarity in teaching as well as research on applying
EMDR Therapy protocols and procedures. Assigning importance
to the therapeutic relationship as another core element in
EMDR Therapy is necessary if we are going to refer to this
methodology as a therapy that treats a broad range of clinical
problems, and when we espouse ourselves to be an evidence-
based approach. Relating the importance of the therapeutic
relationship to attachment theory as part of training and practice
is important for future training, case consultation and research,
as many of us treat attachment-based disorders. Above all, as
therapists we are all committed to best practices which requires
us to go beyond the administration of a therapy method and
accompany our clients on their journey towards healing.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author/s.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work and
has approved it for publication.
REFERENCES
Amano, T., and Toichi, M. (2016). The role of alternating bilateral stimulation in
establishing positive cognition in emdr therapy: a multi-channel near-infrared
spectroscopy study. PLoS One 11:e0162735. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.01
62735
Baek, J., Lee, S., Cho, T., Kim, S.-W., Kim, M., Yoon, Y., et al. (2019). Neural
circuits underlying a psycho therapeutic regimen for fear disorders. Nature 566,
339–343. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-0931-y
Brisch, K. H. (2015). Bindung und Bindungsstörungen – Bedeutung für Diagnose,
Beratung und Therapie. L.-M.-U. t . München: Universität Essen.
Civilotti, C., Cussino, M., Callerame, C., Fernandez, I., and Zaccagnino, M. (2019).
Changing the adult state of mind with respect to attachment: an exploratory
study of the role of EMDR psychotherapy. J. EMDR 13, 176–186. doi: 10.1891/
1933-3196.13.3.176
Dworkin, M. (2005). EMDR and the Relational Imperative . New York, NY:
Routledge.
Flores, P. J. (2013). “Die Bindungstheorie in ihrer Relevanz für die
Suchtbehandlung, ” in Bindung und Sucht , ed. K. H. Brisch (Stuttgart:
Klett-Cotta), 32–59.
Hase, M. (2021). Instant resource installation (IRI) and extensive resource
installation (xtri) - two novel techniques for resource installation in EMDR
therapy – theory, description and case report. J. Trauma Dissoc. (in press).
doi: 10.1016/j.ejtd.2021.100224Hase, M., Balmaceda, U. M., Ostacoli, L., Liebermann, P., and Hofmann, A. (2017).
The AIP model of EMDR therapy and pathogenic memories. Front. Psychol.
8:1578. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01578
Hase, M., Schallmayer, S., and Sack, M. (2008). EMDR – Reprocessing of
the addiction memory: pretreatment, posttreatment and 1-month follow-up.
J. EMDR 2, 170–179. doi: 10.1891/1933-3196.2.3.170
Hofmann, A. (2009a). EMDR Praxishandbuch zur Behandlung traumatisierter
Menschen . Stuttgart: Thieme.
Hofmann, A. (2009b). “The inverted standard protocol, ” in Eye Movement
Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR) Scripted Protocols: Basic and Special
Populations , ed. M. Luber (New York, NY: Springer), 1.
Knipe, J. (2008). “Constant installation of present orientation and safety, ” in
Ressourcenarbeit Mit EMDR , ed. C. Rost (Paderborn: Junfermann). doi: 10.
1891/9780826122452.0018
Korn, D. L., and Leeds, A. M. (2002). Preliminary evidence of eﬃcacy for EMDR
resource development and installation in the stabilization phase of treatment
of complex posttraumatic stress disorder. J. Clin. Psychol. 58, 1465–1487. doi:
10.1002/jclp.10099
Landin-Romero, R., Moreno-Alcazar, A., Pagani, M., and Amann, B. L. (2018).
How does eye movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy work? A
systematic review on suggested mechanisms of action. Front. Psychol. 9:1395.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01395
Lee, C. (2006). The active ingredient in EMDR: is t traditional exposure or dual
focus of attention? Clin. Psychol. Psychother. 13, 97–107. doi: 10.1002/cpp.479
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 May 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 660753
fpsyg-12-660753 May 20, 2021 Time: 13:22 # 7
Hase Structure of EMDR Therapy
Leeds, A. M. (2009). Resources in EMDR and other trauma- focused
psychotherapy: a review. J. EMDR Pract. Res. 3, 152–160. doi: 10.1891/1933-
3196.3.3.152
Manﬁeld, P., Lovett, J., Engel, L., and Manﬁeld, D. (2017). Use of the ﬂash technique
in EMDR therapy: four case examples. J. EMDR Pract. Res. 11, 195–205. doi:
10.1891/1933-3196.11.4.195
Maxﬁeld, L., and Hyer, L. (2002). The relationship between eﬃcacy and
methodology in studies investigating EMDR treatment of PTSD. J. Clin. Psychol
58, 23–41. doi: 10.1002/jclp.1127
Norcross, J. C., and Lambert, M. J. (2011). “Evidence-based therapy relationships, ”
inPsychotherapy Relationships that Work: Evidence-Based Responsiveness , ed.
J. C. Norcross (Oxford University Press), 3–21. doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/
9780199737208.003.0001
Pagani, M., Amann, B. L., Landin-Romero, R., and Carletto, S. (2017). Eye
Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing and Slow Wave Sleep: A
Putative Mechanism of Action. Front Psychol 8:1935. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.
01nbreak935
Shapiro, F., (Ed.) (2002). EMDR as an integrative approach: experts of
diverse orientations explore the paradigm prism . Washington, D.C: American
Psychological Association. doi: 10.1037/10512-000
Shapiro, F. (1989). Eye movement desensitization: a new treatment for
posttraumatic stress disorder. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 20, 211–
217. doi: 10.1016/0005-7916(89)90025-6
Shapiro, F. (2001). Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR): basic
principles, protocols, and procedures . New York, NY: Guilford Press.Shapiro, F. (2018). Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR)
Therapy. Basic Principles, Protocols and Procedures . New York, NY: Guilford.
Shapiro, F., and Laliotis, D. (2011). EMDR and the adaptive information processing
model: integrative treatment and case conceptualization. Clin. Soc. Work J. 39,
191–200. doi: 10.1007/s10615-010-0300-7
Shapiro, F., and Laliotis, D. (2017). Weekend 1 Training of the Two-Part EMDR
Therapy Basic Training . Watsonville, CA: E. I. Inc.
Siegel, D. (2010). The mindful therapist: a clinician’s guide to mindsight and neural
integration. Human. Psychol. 38, 244–248. doi: 10.1080/08873267.2010.512
253
Swift, J. K., Callahan, J. L., Cooper, M., and Parkin, S. (2011). The impact of
accommodating client preference in psychotherapy: a meta-analysis. J. Clin.
Psychol. 74, 1924–1937. doi: 10.1002/jclp.22680
Valiente-Gomez, A., Moreno-Alcázar, A., Treen, D., Cedrón, C., Colom, F., Pérez,
V., et al. (2017). EMDR beyond PTSD: a systematic literature review. Front.
Psychol. 8:1668. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01668
Conﬂict of Interest: The author oﬀers EMDR training and consultation.
Copyright © 2021 Hase. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 May 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 660753
