BLUE KNOT FOUNDATION FACT SHEET 
FOR GENERAL PRACTITIONERS 
UNDERSTANDING COMPLEX TRAUMA
      Blue Knot Helpline 1300 657 380 | blueknot.org.au | 02 8920 3611 | admin@blueknot.org.au
This fact sheet has been made possible through funding provided by the Australian Government Department of Health1Trauma stems from the overwhelming of coping
capacity in light of precipitating event/s. If not resolved, it has a range of negative impacts on physical and emotional health. Trauma can be both `single incident’ (posttraumatic stress disorder; PTSD) and cumulative, underlying and interpersonally generated (`complex’). 
2Complex trauma is more prevalent, and morecomprehensive in its effects, than single-incident  PTSD 
(Courtois & Ford, 2009; van der Kolk, 2009) . The majority 
of people who access the mental health and community service sectors have complex trauma histories 
(Bloom, 2011; Jennings, 2004). 
3Strong longitudinal and epidemiological data
(ACE Study, 1998; 2010)  suggests that on a daily basis 
and often unknowingly, general practitioners see a number of patients who experience the effects of complex trauma. People with diverse presentations, high comorbidity, and/or unspecified pain (i.e. `medically unexplained symptoms’; MUS) can receive discrete diagnoses based on presenting symptoms, which means that the underlying trauma remains unrecognised and thus untreated.
4Extensive research has established the relationshipbetween overwhelming childhood experiences and emotional and physical health problems in adulthood. Childhood coping mechanisms become risk factors for adult ill health if overwhelming childhood stress is not resolved 
(ACE Study, 1998; 2010) . Coping mechanisms which 
were initially adaptive and protective (where `more trauma requires more adaptation’; 
Fisher, 2013 ) negatively 
impact health over time.
5Childhood trauma is complex trauma of which child abuse in all its forms (i.e. sexual, emotional, physical and neglect) is an insidious variety. But childhood experiences do not need to be abusive to be traumatic 
(Hesse, Main et al, 2003) . For example, care-givers with 
unresolved trauma histories may be unable to meet the emotional needs of their children. Unresolved trauma has life-long impacts and affects the next generation as well 
(ibid).6Early life trauma, occurring during formative braindevelopment, is particularly damaging. It affects development of the self per se and a range of functions including the ability to metabolise stress and vital capacities associated with survival 
(Courtois & Ford, 2009: 
Schore; 2003) . Unresolved trauma radically restricts the 
capacity to respond flexibly to daily demands and life challenges, impairs physical and mental functioning, and leads to diverse and often `puzzling’ symptoms.
7Practices to assist health and treat injury, which arethus regarded as benign, can also create trauma (eg the phenomenon of `medical trauma’). Many routine medical procedures and surgeries are experienced as traumatic even when their outcomes are assessed as successful. This especially, but not exclusively, relates to procedures involving immobilisation and anesthesia, and especially but not exclusively with respect to children 
(Levine, 2010). 
8Studies show that hospitalised children(`many of them being treated for injuries  requiring immobilisation’) develop symptoms  similar to those of returning soldiers 
(Levine, 2010) . 
Children admitted to hospital due to injury are at  high risk for development of posttraumatic stress,  even when the injury is relatively minor 
(Sanders et al, 
2005) :`[T]here is still inadequate attention to preventing 
undue fear in people who must undergo painful procedures or general anesthesia’ 
(Levine, 2010:63). 
9Practice which is `trauma informed’ is as attentive tothe way in which a service/procedure is administered as to what the service/procedure comprises. Care with respect to the context of treatment considerably reduces the likelihood of (re)traumatisation. 

BLUE KNOT FOUNDATION FACT SHEET 
FOR GENERAL PRACTITIONERS 
UNDERSTANDING COMPLEX TRAUMA
      Blue Knot Helpline 1300 657 380 | blueknot.org.au | 02 8920 3611 | admin@blueknot.org.au
This fact sheet has been made possible through funding provided by the Australian Government Department of Health
10Core principles of trauma-informed practice are safety, 
trustworthiness, choice, collaboration and empowerment. Active listening to, and validation of, patient experience, and warmth of manner coupled with professionalism and medical expertise, create a context in which patient history, self-reports and disclosures can be conveyed. Attentiveness to context and manner of relating may seem to `take time’ which GPs can ill afford. But it can actually save time by facilitating a context conducive to eliciting valuable patient information, which may be otherwise unavailable  and which may assist in informing treatment decisions.
11Hyper and hypoarousal can be trauma responses. Thedissociative (hypo) response of `emotional shutdown’ is frequently mistaken for, and misdiagnosed as, depression 
(Rothschild, 2011) . Patients exhibiting either/
both hyper and hypoarousal are at the upper limits of their coping capacity. Gentle non-pharmacological assistance to attain/recover emotional self-regulatory ability (e.g. grounding and soothing exercises and resources) is indicated. Autonomic stabilisation should be recovered prior to administration of any non-essential medical procedure, and in cases of emergency, prior to administration of anesthesia where possible. 
12Medication does not treat trauma directly,and where indicated, is best used in conjunction  with psychotherapy. When severe emotional dysregulation inhibits a patient’s capacity to  participate in counselling and/or psychotherapy, medication can help stabilise the patient until self-regulatory capacity is established. It needs to be  noted, however, that in inhibiting experience of emotion, medication can impede access to feelings which need to be processed; medication alone is  not a treatment of choice for trauma.13If trauma is not resolved people cannot `move on’ (`the time honoured expression `time heals all wounds’ simply does not apply to trauma’; 
Levine, 2010:88 ). This 
is why it is imperative that its effects are recognised, understood, and appropriately treated. 
14Complex traumatic stress requires a different
  treatment path than single-incident PTSD
(Courtois & Ford, 2009; van der Kolk, 2003). Prior to release 
of the nationally and internationally endorsed Blue 
Knot Foundation Practice Guidelines for Treatment 
of Complex Trauma and Trauma Informed Care and 
Service Delivery www.blueknot.org.au/guidelines 
trauma guidelines related to single-incident PTSD 
which are inadequate to address complex traumatic 
stress (`There is more to trauma than PTSD’; Shapiro, 
2010). Blue Knot Foundation's Practice Guidelines for the 
Treatment of Complex Trauma & Trauma Informed Care and Service 
Delivery, have been officially recognised as an 
Accepted Clinical Resource by The Royal Australian 
College of General Practitioners.
15It is possible to recover from trauma. Neuroscientific
research establishes that the structure and function of 
the brain can change throughout life ( neuroplasticity) 
and clinical findings show that even severe early life 
trauma can be resolv ed (Siegel, 2003; 2010). Resolution 
of parental trauma also has beneficial effects on 
children, and intercepts transmission of trauma to the 
next generation (ibid). Research shows that optimism 
about recovery from trauma is warranted, and such 
optimism should be communicated to patients. You 
can learn more by attending one of Blue Knot 
Foundation's  professional d evelopment opportunities 
for GPs. To find out more, go to 
www.blueknot.org.au/training

