 
title: Codependent No More : How to Stop Controlling Others and
Start Caring for Yourself
author : Beattie, Melody.
publisher : Hazelden Publishing
isbn10 | asin : 0894864025
print isbn13 : 9780894864025
ebook isbn13 : 9780585126241
language : English
subject Codependency, Substance abuse--Patients--Familyrelationships, Self-care, Health, Co-Dependency(Psychology)--popular works, Self Care--popular works.
publication date : 1992
lcc: RC569.5.C63B43 1992eb
ddc: 616.86
subject: Codependency, Substance abuse--Patients--Familyrelationships, Self-care, Health, Co-Dependency(Psychology)--popular works, Self Care--popular works.
cover
Page i
Codependent No More
 
page_i
Page ii
Other books by Melody Beattie
Beyond Codependency: And Getting Better All the Time
The Language of Letting Go: Daily Meditations for Codependents
Codependents' Guide to the Twelve Steps
 
page_ii
Page iii
Codependent No More
How To Stop Controlling Others and Start Caring for Yourself
Melody Beattie
Rebuilding Lives, Restoring Families, Building Communities
HAZELDEN®
INFORMATION & EDUCATIONAL SERVICES
 
page_iii
Page iv
Hazelden Educational Materials
Center City, Minnesota 55012-0176
© 1987, 1992 by Hazelden Foundation.
All rights reserved. Published 1987. Second Edition 1992.Printed in the United States of America.No portion of this publication may be reproduced in any manner without the written permission of the publisher.
Library  of Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  86-82660
ISBN:  0-89486-402-5
Editor's note:
The Twelve Steps are reprinted with permission of Alcoholics Anonymous World Services, Inc. Permission to reprint theTwelve Steps does not mean that Alcoholics Anonymous has reviewed or approved the contents of this publication, orthat AA agrees with the views expressed herein. The views expressed herein are solely those of the author. AA is aprogram of recovery from alcoholism. Use of the Twelve Steps in connection with the programs and activities that arepatterned after AA, but that address other problems, does not imply otherwise.
 
page_iv
Page v
"It is not easy to find
happiness in ourselves, andit is not possible to find itelsewhere."Agnes Repplier, The Treasure Chest
 
page_v
Page vi
For helping make  this book  possible,  I thank:
God,  my mother,  David,  my children,  Scott Egleston, Sharon  George,
Joanne  Marcuson,  and all  the codependent  people  who  have  learned
from  me and allowed  me to learn  from  them.
This book  is dedicated  to me.
 
page_vi
Page vii
CONTENTS
Preface to the 1992 Edition 1
Introduction 5
Part I: What's Codependency, and Who's Got It?1. Jessica's Story 15
2. Other Stories 21
3. Codependency 31
4. Codependent Characteristics 41
Part II: The Basics of Self-Care5. Detachment 57
6. Don't Be Blown About by Every Wind 67
7. Set Yourself Free 75
8. Remove the Victim 83
9. Undependence 97
10. Live Your Own Life 113
11. Have a Love Affair with Yourself 119
12. Learn the Art of Acceptance 129
13. Feel Your Own Feelings 141
14. Anger 151
15. Yes, You Can Think 163
16. Set Your Own Goals 169
17. Communication 177
18. Work a Twelve Step Program 185
19. Pieces and Bits 207
20. Learning to Live and Love Again 227
Epilogue 235
Notes 237
Bibliography 245
 
page_vii
Page 1
PREFACE TO THE 1992 EDITION
Back in the early eighties, when I first envisioned writing a book about codependencywhen I was desperately struggling
to sort through my own painI vowed that if I ever figured out what happened to me and what I needed to do to get better,I'd write a book about it. That book, I decided, would be warm, gentle, nonjudgmental, nontechnical.
It would be kind. Because that's what I neededinformation and kindness. I needed help with my healing process from my
codependency issues.
About five years later, I sat down to write that book. Just separated from my husband of ten years, I went on welfare for
four months, to help me support myself and my two children, Nichole and Shane, while I wrote Codependent No More.
When I wondered how I, a nonexpert, could write a book like that, I took comfort by telling myself that it was okay to
say what I thought because only a few people would read it anyway. I also spent a great deal of time on the introduction,striving not only to introduce the book, but to introduce the concept of codependencythe wordto a world that, for themost part, had not heard about it.
Now, another five years later, I've been asked to write an anniversary preface to a book that has sold over two million
copies.
"What do I put in it?" I asked my editor and friend, Rebecca Post, from Hazelden."Tell about the changes that have happenedto women, to people in our country, to you, since you wrote that book," she
suggested.
"Hmmm," I pondered. "What changes have happened besides the Persian Gulf War, the breakdown of communism in the
Soviet Union, and the Hill-Thomas hearings?"
I turn on the television. The movie of the week, I can't remember the name, is a story about a teenager struggling to deal
with her alcoholism
 
page_1
Page 2
and the impact of being raped. Her mother, a nurse, has worked valiantly to break free from a dysfunctional and abusive
relationship with her husband, the girl's father. Throughout the movie, mother and daughter talk directly about notrescuing each other because of the diminishing effects of such behavior. The movie ends with the daughter playing aguitar and singing a song she's written about not being a victim anymore.
I walk into a church, one I haven't attended for a long time. The sermon is somewhat unusual this cold, Sunday winter
morning. The minister is speaking from his heart, telling the congregation that he is done leading a church that's based on
shame, fear, guilt, and dishonesty. He wants instead, he says, to be part of a church that's based on equality, honesty,
intimacy, acceptance, and the healing power of God's love. He wants to be part of a church where he can have his ownissues and problems, and where people are functioning in healthy, honest relationships with each other and God.
My daughter comes home from her first week at a new school. "Guess what, Mom?" she says. "We're reading a
meditation each day in homeroom class from your book, The Language of Letting Go. And at my friend's school, they'retalking about codependency issues in health class."
Codependent No More, with a picture of handcuffs broken apart on the front cover, makes the best-seller list in France.Catdependent No More,  parodying the title of my book, makes the 1991 Christmas book list here in Minnesota.
Some things have changed. I've written four more books, traveled the world, divorced (but not remarried), and paid back
the welfare department for the financial help they gave me.
I feel more passionately about the importance of healing from our abuse issues. I feel more passionately. I've become
more spontaneous, embraced my femininity, and learned new lessons along the wayabout boundaries, flexibility, andowning my power. And about love. I'm learning to respect men. My relationships have deepened. Some have changed.
The most significant change in my life has been the loss of my son, Shane. As you may have heard or read, in February
of 1991, three days after his twelfth birthday, my beloved Shaneso much a part of my life
 
page_2
Page 3
and workwas killed suddenly in a ski accident on the slopes at Afton Alps.
I'm learning about death and life.I've grown and changed. I've watched my friends grow and change. Many of you have written to me about your growth
and change.
I still struggle with feeling feelings and trusting my process, my path, and my Higher Power. I still feel afraid at times.
Sometimes I forget and try to control everything. I may become obsessive, unless I catch myself.
And, despite its years on the best-seller list, the most common question I'm still asked by people and the media is, ''Just
exactly what is codependency?''
Some things haven't changed, at least not a lot. I still refuse to be an expert and permanently decline the title of "guru."
But I'm still willing to tell you what I see, and believe.
Although some things appear not to have changed, things are constantly changing, Our consciousness, as individuals and
as a society, has been raised. We've realized that women have souls, and men have feelings.
And I've gone deeper into my healing process than I ever intended.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
I don't know how much my writing has contributed to this consciousness-raising, and how much the consciousness-
raising has contributed to my writing. But I'm grateful to be part of what's happened.
I'm honored to be part of a movement influenced by people such as Anne Wilson Schaef, John Bradshaw, Patrick Carnes,
Earnie Larsen, and led by people such as you, my readersthe real heroesquietly and profoundly doing your own healingwork and carrying the message to others, most significantly by example.
I've met many of you in my travels across the country. Some of you have written to me. Thank you for the love, support,
and compassion you've shown me not only over the years, but throughout the rough, raw months of 1991 after Shane's
death.
 
page_3
Page 4
Many of you have written to me, saying how much I've helped you. Well, you've helped and touched me, too.
One woman wrote to me recently, saying she had read all my books and had been recovering from codependency for
years. "I want to learn more, though," she wrote. "I want to go deeper into my codependency. Please write more aboutthat."
Maybe we don't need to go deeper into our codependency. We can, instead, march forward into our destinies. We can
remember and practice all we've learned about addictions, codependency, and abuse. With compassion and boundaries,we need to commit fully to loving God, ourselves, and others. We need to commit fully to trusting God, ourselves, andour process.
Then we can be open to the next step. We are on time, and we are where we need to be. We can be trusted. So can God.
And letting go and gratitude still work. Keep your head up and your heart open. And let's see what's next. Happy five-year anniversary, Codependent No More.
MELODY BEATTIE
 
page_4
Page 5
INTRODUCTION
My first encounter with codependents occurred in the early sixties. This was before people, tormented by other people's
behavior, were called codependents, and before people addicted to alcohol and other drugs were labeled chemicallydependent. Although I didn't know what codependents were, I usually knew who they were. As an alcoholic and addict, Istormed through life, helping create other codependents.
Codependents were a necessary nuisance. They were hostile, controlling, manipulative, indirect, guilt producing, difficult
to communicate with, generally disagreeable, sometimes downright hateful, and a hindrance to my compulsion to gethigh. They hollered at me, hid my pills, made nasty faces at me, poured my alcohol down the sink, tried to keep me fromgetting more drugs, wanted to know why I was doing this to them, and asked what was wrong with me. But they werealways there, ready to rescue me from self-created disasters. The codependents in my life didn't understand me, and themisunderstanding was mutual. I didn't understand me, and I didn't understand them.
My first professional encounter with codependents occurred years later, in 1976. At that time in Minnesota, addicts and
alcoholics had become chemically dependent, their families and friends had become significant others, and I had becomea recovering addict and alcoholic. By then, I also worked as a counselor in the chemical dependency field, that vastnetwork of institutions, programs, and agencies that helps chemically dependent people get well. Because I'm a womanand most of the significant others at that time were women, and because I had the least seniority and none of my co-workers wanted to do it, my employer at the Minneapolis treatment center told me to organize support groups for wivesof addicts in the program.
I wasn't prepared for this task. I still found codependents hostile, controlling, manipulative, indirect, guilt producing,
difficult to communicate with, and more.
 
page_5
Page 6
In my group, I saw people who felt responsible for the entire world, but they refused to take responsibility for leading
and living their own lives.
I saw people who constantly gave to others but didn't know how to receive. I saw people give until they were angry,
exhausted, and emptied of everything. I saw some give until they gave up. I even saw one woman give and suffer somuch that she died of "old age" and natural causes at age 33. She was the mother of five children and the wife of analcoholic who had been sent to prison for the third time.
I worked with women who were experts at taking care of everyone around them, yet these women doubted their ability to
take care of themselves.
I saw mere shells of people, racing mindlessly from one activity to another. I saw people-pleasers, martyrs, stoics,
tyrants, withering vines, clinging vines, and, borrowing from H. Sackler's line in his play, The Great White Hope,"pinched up faces giving off the miseries."
Most codependents were obsessed with other people. With great precision and detail, they could recite long lists of the
addict's deeds and misdeeds: what he or she thought, felt, did, and said; and what he or she didn't think, feel, do, and say.The codependents knew what the alcoholic or addict should and shouldn't do. And they wondered extensively why he orshe did or didn't do it.
Yet these codependents who had such great insight into others couldn't see themselves. They didn't know what they were
feeling. They weren't sure what they thought. And they didn't know what, if anything, they could do to solve theirproblemsif, indeed, they had any problems other than the alcoholics.
It was a formidable group, these codependents. They were aching, complaining, and trying to control everyone and
everything but themselves. And, except for a few quiet pioneers in family therapy, many counselors (including me) didn'tknow how to help them. The chemical dependency field was flourishing, but help focused on the addict. Literature andtraining on family therapy were scarce. What did codependents need? What did they want? Weren't they just anextension of the alco-
 
page_6
Page 7
holic, a visitor to the treatment center? Why couldn't they cooperate, instead of always making problems? The alcoholic
had an excuse for being so crazyhe was drunk. These significant others had no excuse. They were this way sober.
Soon, I subscribed to two popular beliefs. These crazy codependents (significant others) are sicker than the alcoholics.
And, no wonder the alcoholic drinks; who wouldn't with a crazy spouse like that?
By then, I had been sober for a while. I was beginning to understand myself, but I didn't understand codependency. I
tried, but couldn't until years later, when I became so caught up in the chaos of a few alcoholics that I stopped living myown life. I stopped thinking. I stopped feeling positive emotions, and I was left with rage, bitterness, hatred, fear,depression, helplessness, despair, and guilt. At times, I wanted to stop living. I had no energy. I spent most of my timeworrying about people and trying to figure out how to control them. I couldn't say no (to anything but fun activities) ifmy life depended on it, which it did. My relationships with friends and family members were in shambles. I felt terriblyvictimized. I lost myself and didn't know how it had happened. I didn't know what had happened. I thought I was goingcrazy. And, I thought, shaking a finger at the people around me, it's their fault.
Sadly, aside from myself, nobody knew how badly I felt. My problems were my secret. Unlike the alcoholics and other
troubled people in my life, I wasn't going around making big messes and expecting someone to clean up after me. In fact,next to the alcoholics, I looked good. I was so responsible, so  dependable. Sometimes I  wasn't sure I had a problem. I
knew I felt miserable, but I didn't understand why my life wasn't working.
After floundering in despair for a while, I began to understand. Like many people who judge others harshly, I realized I
had just taken a very long and painful walk in the shoes of those I had judged. I now understood those crazycodependents. I had become one.
Gradually, I began to climb out of my black abyss. Along the way, I developed a passionate interest in the subject of
codependency. As a counselor (although I no longer worked full-time in the field, I still
 
page_7
Page 8
considered myself one) and as a writer, my curiosity was provoked. As a "flaming, careening codependent" (a phrase
borrowed from an Al-Anon member) who needed help, I also had a personal stake in the subject. What happens topeople like me? How does it happen? Why? Most important, what do codependents need to do to feel better? And staythat way?
I talked to counselors, therapists, and codependents. I read the few available books on the subject and related topics. I
reread the basicsthe therapy books that have stood the test of timelooking for ideas that applied. I went to meetings of Al-Anon, a self-help group based on the Twelve Steps of Alcoholics Anonymous but geared toward the person who hasbeen affected by another person's drinking.
Eventually, I found what I was seeking. I began to see, understand, and change. My life started working again. Soon, I
was conducting another group for codependents at another Minneapolis treatment center. But this time, I had a vaguenotion of what I was doing.
I still found codependents hostile, controlling, manipulative, indirect, and all the things I had found them before. I still
saw all the peculiar twists of personality I previously saw. But, I saw deeper.
I saw people who were hostile; they had felt so much hurt that hostility was their only defense against being crushed
again. They were that angry because anyone who had tolerated what they had would be that angry.
They were controlling because everything around and inside them was out of control. Always, the dam of their lives and
the lives of those around them threatened to burst and spew harmful consequences on everyone. And nobody but themseemed to notice or care.
I saw people who manipulated because manipulation appeared to be the only way to get anything done. I worked with
people who were indirect because the systems they lived in seemed incapable of tolerating honesty.
I worked with people who thought they were going crazy because they had believed so many lies they didn't know what
reality was.
 
page_8
Page 9
I saw people who had gotten so absorbed in other people's problems they didn't have time to identify or solve their own.
These were people who had cared so deeply, and often destructively, about other people that they had forgotten how tocare about themselves. The codependents felt responsible for so much because the people around them felt responsiblefor so little; they were just taking up the slack.
I saw hurting, confused people who needed comfort, understanding, and information. I saw victims of alcoholism who
didn't drink but were nonetheless victimized by alcohol. I saw victims struggling desperately to gain some kind of powerover their perpetrators. They learned from me, and I learned from them.
Soon, I began to subscribe to some new beliefs about codependency. Codependents aren't crazier or sicker than
alcoholics. But, they hurt as much or more. They haven't cornered the market on agony, but they have gone through theirpain without the anesthetizing effects of alcohol or other drugs, or the other high states achieved by people withcompulsive disorders. And the pain that comes from loving someone who's in trouble can be profound.
"The chemically dependent partner numbs the feelings and the non-abuser is doubled over in painrelieved only by anger
and occasional fantasies," wrote Janet Geringer Woititz in an article from the book Co-Dependency, An Emerging Issue.1
Codependents are that way sober because they went through what they did sober.No wonder codependents are so crazy. Who wouldn't be, after living with the people they've lived with?
It's been difficult for codependents to get the information and practical help they need and deserve. It's tough enough to
convince alcoholics (or other disturbed people) to seek help. It's more difficult to convince codependentsthose who by
comparison look, but don't feel, normal that they have problems.
Codependents suffered in the backdrop of the sick person. If they recovered, they did that in the background too. Until
recently, many
 
page_9
Page 10
counselors (like me) didn't know what to do to help them. Sometimes codependents were blamed; sometimes they were
ignored; sometimes they were expected to magically shape up (an archaic attitude that has not worked with alcoholicsand doesn't help codependents either). Rarely were codependents treated as individuals who needed help to get better.Rarely were they given a personalized recovery program for their problems and their pain. Yet, by its nature, alcoholismand other compulsive disorders turn everyone affected by the illness into victimspeople who need help even if they arenot drinking, using other drugs, gambling, overeating, or overdoing a compulsion.
That's why I wrote this book. It grew out of my research, my personal and professional experiences, and my passion for
the subject. It is a personal and, in some places, prejudiced opinion.
I'm not an expert, and this isn't a technical book for experts. Whether the person you've let yourself be affected by is an
alcoholic, gambler, foodaholic, workaholic, sexaholic, criminal, rebellious teenager, neurotic parent, another codependent,or any combination of the above, this book is for you, the codependent.
This book is not about how you can help your alcoholic or troubled person, although if you get better, his or her chance
of recovery improves too. 2 There are plenty of good books on how to help the alcoholic. This book is about your mostimportant and probably most neglected responsibility: taking care of yourself. It's about what you can do to start feelingbetter.
I've tried to round up some of the best, most helpful thoughts on codependency. I've included quotes from people I
consider experts, to demonstrate their beliefs. I've also included case histories to show how people dealt with particularproblems. Although I've changed names and certain details to protect privacy, all case histories are true and are notcomposites. I've inserted endnotes to document information, to suggest additional reading, and to attribute material toappropriate sources. But, much of what I've learned has been from many people and their similar thoughts on thissubject. Many ideas have been handed down and passed
 
page_10
Page 11
around, and their sources have become indistinguishable. I've tried to attribute accurately, but in this field that is not
always possible.
Although this is a self-help, how-to book, please remember it's not a cookbook for mental health. Each person is unique;
each situation is unique. Try to tap into your own healing process. That may include seeking professional help, attendingself-help groups such as Al-Anon, and calling on the assistance of a Power greater than yourself.
A friend, Scott Egleston, who is a professional in the mental health field, told me a therapy fable. He heard it from
someone, who heard it from someone else. It goes:
Once upon a time, a woman moved to a cave in the mountains to study with a guru. She wanted, she said, to learn
everything there was to know. The guru supplied her with stacks of books and left her alone so she could study. Everymorning, the guru returned to the cave to monitor the woman's progress. In his hand, he carried a heavy wooden cane.Each morning, he asked her the same question: "Have you learned everything there is to know yet?" Each morning, heranswer was the same. "No," she said, "I haven't." The guru would then strike her over the head with his cane.
This scenario repeated itself for months. One day the guru entered the cave, asked the same question, heard the same
answer, and raised his cane to hit her in the same way, but the woman grabbed the cane from the guru, stopping his
assault in midair.
Relieved to end the daily batterings but fearing reprisal, the woman looked up at the guru. To her surprise, the guru
smiled. "Congratulations," he said, "you have graduated. You now know everything you need to know."
"How's that?" the woman asked."You have learned that you will never learn everything there is to know," he replied. "And you have learned how to stop
the pain."
That's what this book is about: stopping the pain and gaining control of your life.Many people have learned to do it. You can, too.
 
page_11
Page 13
PART 1:
WHAT'S CODEPENDENCY, AND WHO'S GOT IT?
 
page_13
Page 15
1
Jessica's Story
The sun was shining, and it was a beautiful day when I met him. Then, everything went crazy.Georgianne , married to an alcoholic
This is Jessica's story. I'll let her tell it.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
I sat in the kitchen, drinking coffee, thinking about my unfinished housework. Dishes. Dusting. Laundry. The list wasendless, yet I couldn't get started. It was too much to think about. Doing it seemed impossible. Just like my life, I thought.
Fatigue, a familiar feeling, overtook me. I headed for the bedroom. Once a luxury, naps had become a necessity. Sleeping
was about all I could do. Where had my motivation gone? I used to have an excess of energy. Now, it was an effort tocomb my hair and apply makeup daily an effort I frequently didn't put forth.
I lay on my bed and fell into a deep sleep. When I awoke, my first thoughts and feelings were painful. This, also, was
not new. I wasn't sure which hurt most: the raw ache I felt because I was certain my marriage was overthe love was gone,extinguished by the lies and the drinking and the disappointments and the financial problems; the bitter rage I felt towardmy husbandthe man who had caused it all; the despair I felt because God, whom I had trusted, had betrayed me byallowing this to
 
page_15
Page 16
happen; or the mixture of fear, helplessness, and hopelessness that blended into all the other emotions.
Damn him, I thought. Why did he have to drink? Why couldn't he have sobered up earlier? Why did he have to lie? Why
couldn't he have loved me as much as I had loved him? Why didn't he stop drinking and lying years ago, when I still
cared?
I never intended to marry an alcoholic. My father had been one. I had tried so hard to carefully choose my husband.
Great choice. Frank's problem with drinking had become apparent on our honeymoon when he left our hotel suite lateone afternoon and didn't return until 6:30 the next morning. Why didn't I see then? Looking back, the signs were clear.What a fool I had been. ''Oh, no. He's not an alcoholic. Not him,'' I had defended, time and again. I had believed his lies.I had believed my lies. Why didn't I just leave him, get a divorce? Guilt, fear, lack of initiative, and indecision. Besides, Ihad left him before. When we were apart, all I did was feel depressed, think about him, and worry about money. Damnme.
I looked at the clock. Quarter to three. The kids would soon be home from school. Then he would be home, expecting
supper. No housework done today. Nothing ever got done. And it's his fault, I thought. HIS FAULT!
Suddenly, I shifted emotional gears. Was my husband really at work? Maybe he had taken another woman to lunch.
Maybe he was having an affair. Maybe he had left early to drink. Maybe he was at work, creating problems there. Howlong would he have this job, anyway? Another week? Another month? Then he'd quit or be fired, as usual.
The phone rang, interrupting my anxiety. It was a neighbor, a friend. We talked, and I told her about my day."I'm going to Al-Anon tomorrow," she said. "Want to come along?"I had heard about Al-Anon. It was a group for people married to drunks. Visions charged into my mind of "the little
women" huddled at this meeting, making the most of their husbands' drinking, forgiving them, and thinking of little waysto help them.
"I'll see," I lied. "I've got a lot of work to do," I explained, not lying.
 
page_16
Page 17
Outrage poured through me, and I barely heard the rest of our conversation. Of course I didn't want to go to Al-Anon. I
had helped and helped. Hadn't I already done enough for him? I felt furious at the suggestion that I do more and continuegiving to this bottomless pit of unmet needs we called a marriage. I was sick of shouldering the burden and feelingresponsible for the success or failure of the relationship. It's his problem, I railed silently. Let him find his solution. Leaveme out of this. Don't ask another thing of me. Just make him better, and I'll feel better.
After I hung up the phone, I dragged myself into the kitchen to fix supper. Anyway, I'm not the one that needs help, I
thought. I haven't drank, used drugs, lost jobs, and lied to and deceived those I loved. I've held this family together,sometimes by the skin of my teeth. I've paid the bills, maintained a home on a scant budget, been there for everyemergency (and, married to an alcoholic, there had been plenty of emergencies), gone through most bad times alone, andworried to the point of frequent illness. No, I decided, I'm not the irresponsible one. To the contrary, I've beenresponsible for everything and everyone. There was nothing wrong with me. I just needed to get going, start doing mydaily chores. I didn't need meetings to do that. I'd just feel guilty if I went out when I had all this work to do at home.God knows, I didn't need more guilt. Tomorrow, I'd get up and get busy. Things will be better tomorrow.
When the kids came home, I found myself hollering at them. That didn't surprise them or me. My husband was
easygoing, the good guy. I was the bitch. I tried to be pleasant, but it was hard. Anger was always just beneath thesurface. For so long, I had tolerated so much. I was no longer willing or able to tolerate anything. I was always on thedefensive, and I felt like I was, somehow, fighting for my life. Later, I learned I was.
By the time my husband came home, I had put a disinterested effort into preparing supper. We ate, barely talking."I had a good day," Frank said.What does that mean? I wondered. What did you really do? Were you even at work? Furthermore, who cares?"That's nice," I said back.
 
page_17
Page 18
"How was your day?" he asked.
How in the hell do you think it was? I railed silently. After all you've done to me, how do you expect me to have any
day? I flashed him daggers, forced a smile, and said, "My day was okay. Thanks for asking."
Frank looked away. He heard what I wasn't saying, more than what I had said. He knew better than to say anything else;
I did too. We were usually one step way from a raving argument, a recount of past offenses, and screamed threats ofdivorce. We used to thrive on arguments, but we grew sick of them. So we did it silently.
The children interrupted our hostile silence. Our son said he wanted to go to a playground several blocks away. I said no,
I didn't want him to go without his father or me. He wailed he wanted to go, he would go, and I never let him doanything. I yelled he wasn't going, and that was that. He yelled please, I have to go, all the other kids get to go. As usual,I backed down. Okay, go ahead, but be careful, I warned. I felt like I had lost. I always felt like I lostwith my kids andwith my husband. No one ever listened to me; no one took me seriously.
I didn't take me seriously.After supper, I washed dishes while my husband watched television. As usual, I work, and you play. I worry, and you
relax. I care, and you don't. You feel good; I hurt. Damn you. I walked through the living room several times, purposelyblocking his view of the television and secretly flashing him hateful looks. He ignored me. After tiring of this, Ipromenaded into the living room, sighed, and said I was going outside to rake the yard. It's really the man's job, Iexplained, but I guess I'll have to do it. He said he'd do it later. I said later never came, I couldn't wait, I was embarrassedby the yard, just forget it, I was used to doing everything, and I would do that, too. He said okay, he would forget it. Istormed outside and stomped around the yard.
As tired as I was, bedtime came too early. Sleeping with my husband had become as strained as our waking moments.
We would either not speak, each curling up on opposite sides of the bed as far away from each other as possible, or hewould make attemptsas though everything
 
page_18
Page 19
were fineto have sex with me. Either way, it was tense. If we turned our backs to each other, I would lie there with
confused, desperate thoughts. If he tried to touch me, I froze. How could he expect me to make love to him? How couldhe touch me as though nothing had happened? Usually I pushed him away with a sharp, "No, I'm too tired." Sometimes Iagreed. Occasionally, I did it because I wanted to. But, usually, if I had sex with him, it was because I felt obligated totake care of his sexual needs and guilty if I didn't. Either way, sex was psychologically and emotionally unsatisfying.But, I told myself I didn't care. It didn't matter. Not really. Long ago, I had shut off my sexual desires. Long ago, I hadshut off my need to give and receive love. I had frozen that part of me that felt and cared. I had to, to survive.
I had expected so much of this marriage. I had so many dreams for us. None of them had come true. I had been tricked,
betrayed. My home and family-the place and people who should have been warm, nurturing, a comfort, a haven oflovehad become a trap. And I couldn't find the way out. Maybe, I kept telling myself, it will get better. After all, theproblems are his fault. He's an alcoholic. When he gets better, our marriage will get better.
But, I was beginning to wonder. He had been sober and attending Alcoholics Anonymous for six months. He was getting
better. I wasn't. Was his recovery really enough to make me happy? So far, his sobriety didn't appear to be changing theway I felt, which was, at age 32, dried up, used up, and brittle. What had happened to our love? What had happened tome?
One month later, I began to suspect what I would soon learn was the truth. By then, the only thing that had changed was
I felt worse. My life had ground to a halt; I wanted it to end. I had no hope that things would get better; I didn't evenknow what was wrong. I had no purpose, except to care for other people, and I wasn't doing a good job of that. I was
stuck in the past and terrified of the future. God seemed to have abandoned me. I felt guilty all the time and wondered if
I was going crazy. Something dreadful, something that I couldn't explain, had happened to
 
page_19
Page 20
me. It had snuck up on me and ruined my life. Somehow, I had been affected by his drinking, and the ways I had been
affected had become my  problems. It no longer mattered whose fault it was.
I had lost control.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
I met Jessica at this point in her life. She was about to learn three fundamental ideas.
1) She wasn't crazy; she was codependent. Alcoholism and other compulsive disorders are truly family illnesses. The way
the illness affects other family members is called codependency.
2) Once they have been affectedonce "it" sets incodependency takes on a life of its own. It is similar to catching
pneumonia or picking up a destructive habit. Once you've got it, you've got it.
3) If you want to get rid of it, you  have to do something to make it go away. It doesn't matter whose fault it is. Your
codependency becomes your problem; solving your problems is your responsibility.If you're codependent, you need to find your own recovery or healing process. To begin that recovery, it helps to
understand codependency and certain attitudes, feelings, and behaviors that often accompany it. It is also important tochange some of these attitudes and behaviors and understand what to expect as these changes occur.
This book will search for those understandings and encourage those changes. I'm happy to say Jessica's story had a happy
ending or a new beginning. She got better. She started living her own life. I hope you do too.
 
page_20
Page 21
2 
Other Stories
When I say I'm codependent, I don't mean I'm a little bit codependent. I mean I'm really codependent. I don't marrymen who stop for a few beers after work. I marry men who won't work.Ellen, an Al-Anon member
Maybe you identified with Jessica in the last chapter. Her story is an extreme example of codependency, but it is one I
hear frequently. However, Jessica's experience is not the only type of codependency. There are as many variations of thatstory as there are codependents to tell them.
Here are a few.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
Gerald, a handsome and personable man in his early forties, calls himself "a success in business but a failure in
relationships with women." During high school and college, Gerald dated many women. He was popular and considereda good catch. However, after graduation, Gerald stunned his family and friends when he married Rita. Rita treated Geraldworse than any other woman he had dated. She acted cool and hostile toward Gerald and his friends, shared few interests
with him, and didn't seem to care much for or about Gerald. Thirteen years later, the marriage ended in divorce when
Gerald discovered some things he had suspected for years were true: Rita had been dating other men since they were
 
page_21
Page 22
married, and she was (and had been for some time) abusing alcohol and other drugs.
Gerald was devastated. But, after mourning for about two months, he fell wildly in love with another woman, who was a
start-in-the-morning-and-drink-'til-she-passes-out alcoholic. After spending several months worrying about her, tryingto help her, trying to figure out what he was doing that caused her to drink, trying to control her drinking, and ultimatelygetting angry with her because she wouldn't stop drinking, Gerald terminated that relationship. Soon he met anotherwoman, fell in love with her, and moved into her apartment. Within months, Gerald suspected she too was chemicallydependent.
Soon, Gerald began spending much of his time worrying about his girlfriend. He checked up on her, rummaged through
her purse looking for pills or other evidence, and questioned her about her activities. Sometimes, he simply denied shehad a problem. During those times, he kept busy, tried to enjoy his time with his girlfriend (although he said he feltuneasy), and told himself, "It's just me. Something's wrong with me."
During one of the many crises in his most recent relationship, when Gerald was temporarily jolted out of denial, he went
to a chemical dependency counselor for advice.
"I know I should end the relationship," Gerald said, "but I'm just not ready to let it go. We can talk about anything and
everything together. We're such good friends. And I love her. Why? Why does this always happen to me?
"Give me a room full of women, and I'll fall in love with the one with the most problemsthe one that will treat me the
worst. Frankly, they're more of a challenge," Gerald confided. "If a woman treats me too well, it turns me off."
Gerald considered himself a social drinker who had never had problems as a result of his drinking. Gerald told the
counselor he had never used drugs. Gerald's brother, now in his late forties, had been an alcoholic since he was ateenager. Gerald denied that either of his deceased parents was an alcoholic, but reluctantly admitted his dad may have"drunk too much."
 
page_22
Page 23
The counselor suggested the alcoholism and excessive drinking in Gerald's immediate family may still be affecting him
and his relationships.
"How could their problems be affecting me?" he asked. "Dad has been dead for years, and I rarely see my brother."After a few counseling sessions, Gerald began to label himself codependent, but he wasn't sure exactly what that meant
or what to do about it. When Gerald became less angry about the immediate problem in his relationship, he discontinuedcounseling. Gerald decided his girlfriend's problems with drugs weren't that bad. He became convinced his problems withwomen were due to bad luck. He said he hoped his luck would change someday.
Is Gerald's problem bad luck? Or is it codependency?
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
Patty was in her mid-thirties and had been married for eleven years when she sought help from a private therapist. She
had three children, the youngest of whom had cerebral palsy. Patty had devoted her life to being a good wife and mother.She told her therapist she loved her children, didn't regret her decision to stay home and raise them, but hated her dailyroutine. Before her marriage, she had many friends and hobbies, worked as a nurse, and was interested in the worldaround her. However, in the years following the birth of her children, particularly her handicapped child, she had lost her
enthusiasm for life. She had few friends, had gained over 80 pounds, didn't know what she was feeling, and if she did,
felt guilty for feeling that way. She explained she had tried to stay active by helping her friends and doing volunteer work
for various organizations, but her efforts usually resulted in feelings of ineffectiveness and resentment. She thought aboutreturning to work, but she didn't because, "All I know is nursing, and I'm sick of taking care of people."
"My family and friends think I'm a tower of strength. Good ol' dependable Patty. Always there. Always in control.
Always ready to help them. The truth is," Patty said, "I'm falling apart, very quietly but very
 
page_23
Page 24
certainly. I've been depressed for years. I can't shake it. I cry at the drop of a hat. I don't have any energy. I scream at the
kids all the time. I don't have any interest in sex, at least not with my husband. I feel guilty all the time about everything.I even feel guilty about coming to see you," she told the counselor. "I should be able to solve my own problems. I shouldbe able to just snap out of this. It's ridiculous to waste your time and my husband's money for my problems, problemsI'm probably imagining and blowing way out of proportion.
"But I had to do something," Patty confessed. "Lately, I've been thinking about suicide. Of course," she added, "I'd never
actually kill myself. Too many people need me. Too many people depend on me. I'd be letting them down. But I'mworried. I'm scared.''
The counselor learned Patty and her husband had children, the youngest with cerebral palsy. Patty also said before their
marriage, her husband had problems with alcohol. During their marriage, he had drank less, had held the same job, andhad been a good provider. But, upon questioning, Patty told the counselor her husband had not attended AlcoholicsAnonymous meetings or any other support group. Instead, he went "on the wagon" for months between weekenddrinking binges. When he drank, he acted crazy. When he wasn't drinking, he was angry and hostile.
"I don't know what's happened to him. He's not the man I married. What's even more frightening is I don't know what's
happening to me or who I am," Patty said. "It's difficult to explain exactly what the problem is. I don't understand itmyself. There's no major problem I can point to and say, 'That's what's wrong.' But it feels like I've lost myself. At times,I wonder if I'm going crazy. What's wrong with me?" Patty asked.
"Maybe your husband is an alcoholic, and your problems are caused by the family disease of alcoholism," the counselor
suggested.
"How could that be?" Patty asked. "My husband doesn't drink that often."The counselor dug into Patty's background. Patty talked with fondness about her parents and her two adult brothers. She
came from a good family that was close and successful.
 
page_24
Page 25
The counselor dug deeper. Patty mentioned her father had attended Alcoholics Anonymous since she was a teenager.
"Dad sobered up when I was in high school," she said. "I really love him, and I'm proud of him. But his drinking years
were some pretty crazy years for our family."
Not only was Patty married to someone who was probably an alcoholic, she is what is now called an adult child of an
alcoholic. The entire family had been affected by the family disease of alcoholism. Her dad stopped drinking; her motherwent to Al-Anon; family life improved. But Patty, too, had been affected. Was she expected to magically overcome theways she had been affected, just because the drinking stopped?
Instead of additional counseling sessions, Patty's counselor referred Patty to a self-esteem course and an assertiveness
class. The counselor also recommended Patty attend Al-Anon meetings or Adult Children of Alcoholics meetings, whichare self-help groups based on the Twelve Steps of Alcoholics Anonymous.
Patty followed the counselor's advice. She didn't find an overnight cure, but as the months passed she found herself
making decisions with greater ease, feeling and expressing her feelings, saying what she thought, paying attention to her
needs, and feeling less guilty. She became more tolerant of herself and her daily routine. Gradually, her depression lifted.
She cried less and laughed more. Her energy and enthusiasm for life returned. Incidentally, with no prodding from Patty,her husband joined Alcoholics Anonymous. He became less hostile, and their marriage began to improve. The point hereis Patty gained control of her life. Her life started working.
Now, if you ask Patty what her problem is or was, she will answer: "I'm codependent."
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
Clients who seek help from mental health and chemical dependency agencies are not the only people who suffer from
codependency. Randell was a chemical dependency counselor and a recovering alcoholic with
 
page_25
Page 26
several years of sobriety when he found himself having troubles. Randell was also an adult child of an alcoholic; his
father and three brothers were alcoholics. An intelligent, sensitive man who enjoyed his work, Randell's problem was hisleisure time. He spent most of it worrying aboutobsessed withother people and their problems. Sometimes he tried tountangle messes alcoholics created; other times he felt angry with the alcoholics for creating the messes he felt obligatedto clean up; sometimes he felt upset because people, not necessarily alcoholics, behaved in particular ways. He ranted,felt guilty, sorry, and used by people. Rarely, however, did he feel close to them. Rarely did he have fun.
For many years, Randell believed his duty was to worry about people and get involved in their problems. He called his
behavior kindness, concern, love, and, sometimes, righteous indignation. Now, after getting help for his problem, he callsit codependency.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
Sometimes, codependent behavior becomes inextricably entangled with being a good wife, mother, husband, brother, orChristian. Now in her forties, Marlyss is an attractive womanwhen she takes care of herself. Most of the time, however,she's busy taking care of her five children and her husband, who is a recovering alcoholic. She devoted her life to makingthem happy, but she didn't succeed. Usually, she feels angry and unappreciated for her efforts, and her family feels angryat her. She has sex with her husband whenever he wants, regardless of how she feels. She spends too much of thefamily's budget on toys and clothing for the childrenwhatever they want. She chauffeurs, reads to, cooks for, cleans for,cuddles, and coddles those around her, but nobody gives to her. Most of the time, they don't even say, ''Thank you."Marlyss resents her constant giving to people in her life. She resents how her family and their needs control her life. Shechose nursing as her profession, and she often resents that.
"But I feel guilty when I don't do what's asked of me. I feel guilty when I don't live up to my standards for a wife and
mother. I feel guilty when I don't live up to other people's standards for me. I just plain feel
 
page_26
Page 27
guilty," she said. "In fact," she added, "I schedule my day, my priorities, according to guilt.''
Does endlessly taking care of other people, resenting it, and expecting nothing in return mean Marlyss is a good wife and
mother? Or could it mean Marlyss is codependent?
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
Alcoholism (or chemical dependency) is not the only family problem that can create a codependent person. Alissa, the
mother of two teenagers, worked part-time at a mental health organization when she went to a family counselor. (She
had previously gone to many family counselors in her search for help.) She went to counseling because her oldest child, afourteen-year-old boy, was constantly causing problems. He ran away, broke curfew, skipped school, disobeyed otherfamily rules, and generally did whatever he wanted, whenever he wanted.
"This child," Alissa told the counselor, "is driving me crazy."She meant it. She was worried sick. Some days she was so depressed and troubled she couldn't get out of bed. Alissa had
tried everything she could think of to help this child. She'd placed him in treatment three times, put him in two differentfoster homes, and dragged the whole family from counselor to counselor. Alissa had tried other techniques, too: She hadthreatened, cried, hollered, and begged. She had gotten tough and called the police on him. She had tried gentleness andforgiveness. She even tried acting like he hadn't done the inappropriate things he had done. She had locked him out. Andshe had traveled halfway across the state to bring him home after he ran away. Although her efforts hadn't helped herchild, Alissa was obsessed with finding and doing the one thing that would "make him see the errors of his ways" andhelp him change.
"Why," she asked the counselor, "is he doing this to me? He's running and ruining my life!"The counselor agreed the problem with Alissa's son was painful, upsetting, and required action. But the counselor also
said the problem didn't have to run and ruin Alissa's life.
 
page_27
Page 28
"You haven't been able to control your son, but you can gain control of yourself," he said. "You can deal with your own
codependency."
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
Sheryl also labels herself codependent. Shortly after marrying the man of her dreams, she found herself in a nightmare.Her husband, she learned, was a sex addict. In his case, that meant he couldn't control his urges to indulge inpornography, he was compulsively drawn into affairs with other women, and as Sheryl put it, "God only knows what andwho else." She learned her husband was a sex addict one week after their wedding, when she discovered him in bed withanother woman.
Sheryl's first response was panic. Then she got angry. Then she felt concernfor her husband and his problem. Her friends
advised her to leave him, but she decided to stay in the marriage. He needed help. He needed her. Maybe he wouldchange. Besides, she wasn't ready to lose her dream of that rosy future they would have together.
Her husband joined Sex Addicts Anonymous, a Twelve Step self-help group similar to Alcoholics Anonymous. Sheryl
refused to join Co-SA (similar to Al-Anon) for family members of sex addicts. She didn't want to go public with herproblem; she didn't even want to discuss it privately.
Over a period of months, Sheryl, a successful fashion model, found herself accepting fewer work assignments, turning
down evenings out with friends, and sticking closer to home. She wanted to answer the telephone, in case women calledfor her husband. She wanted to be home to see her husband when he left the house and returned. She wanted to see whathe looked like, how he acted, and how he talked. She wanted to know exactly what he was doing and with whom he wasdoing it. She often called his S.A. sponsor to complain, to report, and to inquire about her husband's progress. Sherefused, she said, to be tricked and deceived again.
Gradually, she alienated herself from her friends and activities. She was too worried to work; she was too ashamed to talk
to her friends. Her husband had several more affairs; her friends were frustrated with her for
 
page_28
Page 29
staying with him and constantly whining about how terrible it was to be his wife.
"I couldn't stand the sight of my husband. I had nothing but contempt for him. Yet, I couldn't bring myself to leave him,"
Sheryl reported later. "I couldn't make myself do much of anything except worry and check up on him.
"My turning point was the night I chased him with a butcher knife," Sheryl said. "It was my lowest point. I was running
through the house screaming and raving, when I suddenly became aware, for the first time, of me. I had gone mad. I wascrazycompletely out of controland he just stood there, calmly looking at me. I knew then I had to do something to gethelp for me."
Sheryl joined Co-SA shortly after that incident. It was at those meetings that she began to label herself and her loss of
control as codependency. Sheryl is now separated from her husband and seeking a divorce. She is also feeling betterabout herself.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
Although the preceding examples have been dramatic, codependency doesn't necessarily have to be so intense. And itdoesn't always involve experiences with deeply troubled people. Kristen is married, has two young children, and knowsof no alcoholism or compulsive disorders in her immediate or extended family. Yet, she calls herself codependent. Herproblem, she says, is that other people's moods control her emotions; she, in turn, tries to control their feelings.
"If my husband is happy, and I feel responsible for that, then I'm happy. If he's upset, I feel responsible for that, too. I'm
anxious, uncomfortable, and upset until he feels better. I try to make  him feel better. I feel guilty if I can't. And he gets
angry with me for trying.
"And it's not only with him that I behave codependently," she added. "It's with everyone: my parents, my children, guests
in my home. Somehow, I just seem to lose myself in other people. I get enmeshed in them.
 
page_29
Page 30
"I'd like to do something about itthis thing called codependencybefore it gets any worse. I'm not terribly unhappy," she
said, "but I'd like to learn how to relax and start enjoying myself and other people."
A minister summarized the condition this way: "Some people are really codependent, and some of us are just a little bit
codependent."
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
I chose the preceding examples because they're interesting and represent a variety of experiences. They also illuminate apoint that needs to be made: No single example illustrates the typical codependent or his or her experience.Codependency is complex. People are complex. Each person is unique, and each person's situation is different. Somepeople have extremely painful and debilitating experiences with codependency. Others don't and may be only mildlyaffected. Sometimes codependency is a person's response to another person's alcoholism; sometimes it isn't. Eachcodependent has a unique experience born from his or her circumstances, history, and personality.
Yet, a common thread runs through all stories of codependency. It involves our responses and reactions to people around
us. It involves our relationships with other people, whether they are alcoholics, gamblers, sex addicts, overeaters, ornormal people. Codependency involves the effects these people have on us and how we, in turn, try to affect them.
As Al-Anon members say, "Identify, don't compare."
Activity
1. Did you identify with any people in this chapter? What helped you think of yourself? Which relationships did it bring
to mind? Why?
2. You might find it helpful to buy a large notebook and record your responses to these activities. You can also write
down other thoughts and feelings you have as you read this book.
 
page_30
Page 31
3
Codependency
Relationships are like a dance, with visible energy racing back and forth between the partners. Some relationships arethe slow, dark dance of death. 1Colette Dowling
Up to this point, I have been using the words codependent and codependency  as lucid terms. However, the definitions of
these words remain vague.The definition of chemical dependency means being dependent (psychologically and/or physically) on alcohol or other
drugs. Overeating and gambling are also words that bring specific ideas to mind. But what is codependency?
The obvious definition would be: being a partner in dependency. This definition is close to the truth but still unclear. It
brings no specific image to mind. Codependency is part of treatment center jargon, professional slang that's probablyunintelligible to people outside that profession and gibberish to some inside the trade.
Jargon may or may not mean anything in particular. Jargon may mean different things to different people. Or, people
may sense what a term means but not be able to clearly define it, because it's never been clearly defined.
Those are some of the problems I've encountered with researching and attempting to define codependency and
codependent. Many people haven't heard the terms. Others, who are familiar with the words, can't
 
page_31
Page 32
define them. If they can, each definition is different. Or people define the words by using more jargon. To complicate
matters, I can't find the words in any dictionaries. My computer keeps tagging the words as misspelled, trying toconvince me they're not words.
Yet, codependency does mean something in particular, something particularly important to me and millions of people.
Let's get rid of the jargon and look at that meaning.
What's Codependency?
I have heard and read many definitions of codependency.In an article from the book Co-Dependency, An Emerging Issue, Robert Subby wrote codependency is: "An emotional,
psychological, and behavioral condition that develops as a result of an individual's prolonged exposure to, and practiceof, a set of oppressive rulesrules which prevent the open expression of feeling as well as the direct discussion of personaland interpersonal problems." 2
Earnie Larsen, another codependency specialist and a pioneer in that field, defines codependency as: "Those self-
defeating, learned behaviors or character defects that result in a diminished capacity to initiate or to participate in lovingrelationships."
Some less professional definitions follow.
"Codependency means," said one woman, "that I'm a caretaker."
"Being codependent means I'm married to an alcoholic," responded one woman. "It also means I need to go to Al-Anon."
"Codependency," replied another, "means I'm up to my elbows in alcoholics.""It means I'm always looking for someone to glob onto.""Codependency? It means I know any man I'm attracted to, fall in love with, or marry will be chemically dependent or
have some other equally serious problem."
"Codependency," explained one person, "is knowing all your relationships will either go on and on the same way
(painfully), or end the same way (disastrously). Or both."
 
page_32
Page 33
There are almost as many definitions of codependency as there are experiences that represent it. In desperation (or
perhaps enlightenment), some therapists have proclaimed: "Codependency is anything, and everyone is codependent." So,who's got the inside story? Which definition is accurate? A brief history of codependency will help answer this question.
A Brief History
The word codependency appeared on the treatment scene in the late seventies. I don't know who discovered it. Although
several people may claim to have done so, the word emerged simultaneously in several different treatment centers inMinnesota, according to information from the office of Sondra Smalley, C.C.D.P., a licensed psychologist and a leader inthe codependency field. Maybe Minnesota, the heartland of chemical dependency treatment and Twelve Step programsfor compulsive disorders, discovered it.
Robert Subby and John Friel, in an article from the book Co-Dependency, An Emerging Issue, wrote: "Originally, it was
used to describe the person or persons whose lives were affected as a result of their being involved with someone whowas chemically dependent. The codependent spouse or child or lover of someone who was chemically dependent wasseen as having developed a pattern of coping with life that was not healthy, as a reaction to someone else's drug oralcohol abuse." 3
It was a new name for an old game. Professionals had long suspected something peculiar happened to people who were
closely involved with chemically dependent people. Some research had been done on the subject, indicating a physical,mental, emotional, and spiritual condition similar to alcoholism seemed to appear in many nonalcoholic or non-chemically dependent people who were close to an alcoholic. Words (more jargon which would later becomesynonymous for codependent) surfaced to describe this phenomenon: co-alcoholic, nonalcoholic, para-alcoholic.
Codependents certainly felt the effects of codependency long before the word was coined. In the 1940s, after the birth of
Alcoholics Anony-
 
page_33
Page 34
mous, a group of peopleprimarily wives of alcoholicsformed self-help, support groups to deal with the ways their
spouses' alcoholism affected them. 4 They didn't know they would later be called codependents. They did know they hadbeen directly affected by their mates' alcoholism. And, they were envious that alcoholics had a Twelve Step program torecover through. The wives also wanted a program. So they used the A.A. Twelve Step program, revised the A.A.Twelve Traditions, changed its name to Al-Anon, and it worked! Millions of people have since benefited from Al-Anon. 5
The basic thought then, and in 1979 when the word codependency emerged, was codependents (co-alcoholics or para-alcoholics) were people whose lives had become unmanageable as a result of living in a committed relationship with analcoholic. 6
However, the definition for codependency has expanded since then. Professionals began to better understand the effects
of the chemically dependent person on the family, and the effects of the family on the chemically dependent person.
Professionals began to identify other problems such as overeating and undereating, gambling, and certain sexualbehaviors. These compulsive disorders paralleled the compulsive disorder, or illness, of alcoholism. Professionals alsobegan to notice many people in close relationships with these compulsive people developed patterns of reacting andcoping that resembled the coping patterns of people in relationships with alcoholics. Something peculiar had happened tothese families, too.
As professionals began to understand codependency better, more groups of people appeared to have it: adult children of
alcoholics; people in relationships with emotionally or mentally disturbed persons; people in relationships withchronically ill people; parents of children with behavior problems; people in relationships with irresponsible people;professionalsnurses, social workers, and others in "helping" occupations. Even recovering alcoholics and addicts noticedthey were codependent and perhaps had been long before becoming chemically dependent. 7 Codependents started
cropping up everywhere.
 
page_34
Page 35
When a codependent discontinued his or her relationship with a troubled person, the codependent frequently sought
another troubled person and repeated the codependent behaviors with that new person. These behaviors, or copingmechanisms, seemed to prevail throughout the codependent's lifeif that person didn't change these behaviors.
Was it safe to assume codependency was triggered through relationships with people who have serious illnesses, behavior
problems, or destructive compulsive disorders? Alcoholism in the family helped create codependency, but many othercircumstances seemed to produce it, also.
One fairly common denominator was having a relationship, personally or professionally, with troubled, needy, or
dependent people. But a second, more common denominator seemed to be the unwritten, silent rules that usually developin the immediate family and set the pace for relationships. 8 These rules prohibit discussion about problems; openexpression of feelings; direct, honest communication; realistic expectations, such as being human, vulnerable, orimperfect; selfishness; trust in other people and one's self; playing and having fun; and rocking the delicately balancedfamily canoe through growth or changehowever healthy and beneficial that movement might be. These rules are commonto alcoholic family systems but can emerge in other families too.
Now, I return to an earlier question: Which definition of codependency is accurate? They all are. Some describe the
cause, some the effects, some the overall condition, some the symptoms, some the patterns, and some the pain.Codependency either meant, or has come to mean, all the definitions listed earlier.
I'm not trying to confuse you. Codependency has a fuzzy definition because it is a gray, fuzzy condition. It is complex,
theoretical, and difficult to completely define in one or two sentences.
Why all this fuss about a definition? Because I'm going to attempt the difficultdefine codependent in one sentence. And,
I want you to see the broader picture before I show you the narrower one. I hope this approach might help you identifycodependency in yourself, if that identification is appropriate. Defining the problem is important because it
 
page_35
Page 36
helps determine the solution. Here, the solution is vital. It means feeling better. It means recovery.
So, here is my definition of a codependent:
A codependent person is one who has let another person's behavior affect him or her, and who is obsessed with
controlling that person's behavior.
The other person might be a child, an adult, a lover, a spouse, a brother, a sister, a grandparent, a parent, a client, or abest friend. He or she could be an alcoholic, a drug addict, a mentally or physically ill person, a normal person who
occasionally has sad feelings, or one of the people mentioned earlier.
But, the heart of the definition and recovery lies not in the other person no matter how much we believe it does. It lies in
ourselves, in the ways we have let other people's behavior affect us and in the ways we try to affect them: the obsessing,
the controlling, the obsessive ''helping," caretaking, low self-worth bordering on self-hatred, self-repression, abundanceof anger and guilt, peculiar dependency on peculiar people, attraction to and tolerance for the bizarre, other-centerednessthat results in abandonment of self, communication problems, intimacy problems, and an ongoing whirlwind trip throughthe five-stage grief process.
Is codependency an illness? Some professionals say codependency isn't a disease; they say it's a normal reaction to
abnormal people. 9
Other professionals say codependency is a disease; it's a chronic, progressive illness. They suggest codependents want
and need sick people around them to be happy in an unhealthy way. They say, for instance, the wife of an alcoholicneeded to marry an alcoholic and chose him because she unconsciously thought he was an alcoholic. Furthermore, sheneeded him drinking and socking it to her to feel fulfilled.
This latter judgment may be overly harsh. I'm convinced codependents need less harshness in their lives. Other people
have been hard enough on us. We have been hard enough on ourselves. Friends, we have
 
page_36
Page 37
suffered enough. We have been victimized by diseases and people. Each of us must decide what part we played in our
victimization.
I don't know if codependency is or isn't an illness. I'm not an expert. But, to tell you what I believe, let me complete the
brief history of codependency which I started earlier in this chapter.
Although the first Al-Anon groups were formed in the 1940s, I am certain we could go back to the beginning of time and
human relationships and find glimmers of codependent behavior. People have always had problems, and others havealways cared for their troubled friends and relatives. People have likely been caught up with the problems of others sincerelationships began.
Codependency probably trailed man as he struggled through the remaining B.C. years, right up to ''these generally
wretched times of the twentieth century," as Morley Safer of 60 Minutes says. Ever since people first existed, they havebeen doing all the things we label "codependent." They have worried themselves sick about other people. They have triedto help in ways that didn't help. They have said yes when they meant no. They have tried to make other people see thingstheir way. They have bent over backward to avoid hurting people's feelings and, in so doing, have hurt themselves. Theyhave been afraid to trust their feelings. They have believed lies and then felt betrayed. They have wanted to get even andpunish others. They have felt so angry they wanted to kill. They have struggled for their rights while other people saidthey didn't have any. They have worn sackcloth because they didn't believe they deserved silk.
Codependents have undoubtedly done good deeds too. By their nature, codependents are benevolentconcerned about and
responsive to the needs of the world. As Thomas Wright writes in an article from the book Co-Dependency, AnEmerging Issue, "I suspect codependents have historically attacked social injustice and fought for the rights of theunderdog. Codependents want to help. I suspect they have helped. But they probably died thinking they didn't do enoughand were feeling guilty.
"It is natural to want to protect and help the people we care about. It is also natural to be affected by and react to the
problems of people
 
page_37
Page 38
around us. As a problem becomes more serious and remains unresolved, we become more affected and react more
intensely to it."
The word react is important here. However you approach codependency, however you define it, and from whatever frame
of reference you choose to diagnose and treat it, codependency is primarily a reactionary process. Codependents are
reactionaries. They overreact. They under-react. But rarely do they act.  They react to the problems, pains, lives, and
behaviors of others. They react to their own problems, pains, and behaviors. Many codependent reactions are reactions tostress and uncertainty of living or growing up with alcoholism and other problems. It is normal to react to stress. It is notnecessarily abnormal, but it is heroic and lifesaving to learn how to not react and to act in more healthy ways. Most ofus, however, need help to learn to do that.
Perhaps one reason some professionals call codependency a disease is because many codependents are reacting to an
illness such as alcoholism.
Another reason codependency is called a disease is because it is progressive. As the people around us become sicker, we
may begin to react more intensely. What began as a little concern may trigger isolation, depression, emotional or physicalillness, or suicidal fantasies. One thing leads to another, and things get worse. Codependency may not be an illness, but itcan make you sick. And, it can help the people around you stay sick.
Another reason codependency is called a disease is because codependent behaviorslike many self-destructive
behaviorsbecome habitual. We repeat habits without thinking. Habits take on a life of their own. 10
Whatever problem the other person has, codependency involves a habitual system of thinking, feeling, and behaving
toward ourselves and others that can cause us pain. Codependent behaviors or habits are self-destructive. We frequentlyreact to people who are destroying themselves; we react by learning to destroy ourselves. These habits can lead us into,or keep us in, destructive relationships, relationships that don't work. These behaviors can sabotage relationships that mayotherwise
 
page_38
Page 39
have worked. These behaviors can prevent us from finding peace and happiness with the most important person in our
livesourselves. These behaviors belong to the only person each of us can controlthe only person we can changeourselves.These are our problems. In the next chapter, we will examine these behaviors.
Activity
1. How would you define codependency?
2. Do you know anybody who has significantly affected your life, somebody whom you worry about and wish you could
change? Who? Write several paragraphs about that person and your relationship. Later, read what you wrote. What areyour feelings?
 
page_39
Page 41
4Codependent Characteristics
God, grant me the serenityTo accept the things I cannot change,Courage to change the things I can,And wisdom to know the difference.The Serenity Prayer
Although two codependents might disagree on the definition of codependency, if they discuss the issues with each other,
each will probably sense what the other person means. They will share ideas about things they have in commonthingsthey do, think, feel, and saythat are characteristic of codependency. It is on these pointssymptoms, problems, coping
mechanisms, or reactionsthat most definitions and recovery programs overlap and agree. These points dictate recovery.
They are the things we need to recognize, accept, live with, deal with, struggle through, and frequently change.
Before I list the things codependents tend to do, however, I will make an important point: Having these problems does
not mean we're bad, defective, or inferior. Some of us learned these behaviors as children. Other people learned themlater in life. We may have learned some of these things from our interpretation of religion. Some women were taughtthese behaviors were desirable feminine attributes. Wherever we learned to do these things, most of us learned ourlessons well.
Most of us started doing these things out of necessity to protect ourselves and meet our needs. We performed, felt, and
thought these things
 
page_41
Page 42
to surviveemotionally, mentally, and sometimes physically. We tried to understand and cope with our complex worlds in
the best ways. It is not always easy to live with normal, healthy people. It is particularly difficult to live with sick,disturbed, or troubled people. It is horrible having to live with a raving alcoholic. Many of us have been trying to copewith outrageous circumstances, and these efforts have been both admirable and heroic. We have done the best we could.
However, these self-protective devices may have outgrown their usefulness. Sometimes, the things we do to protect
ourselves turn on us and hurt us. They become self-destructive. Many codependents are barely surviving, and most aren'tgetting their needs met. As counselor Scott Egleston says, codependency is a way of getting needs met that doesn't getneeds met. We've been doing the wrong things for the right reasons.
Can we change? Can we learn healthier behaviors? I don't know if mental, spiritual, and emotional health can be taught,
but we can be inspired and encouraged. We can learn to do things differently. We can change. I think most people wantto be healthy and live the best lives they can. But many of us don't know it's okay to do things differently. Many of usdon't even understand what we've been doing that hasn't been working. Most of us have been so busy responding to otherpeople's problems that we haven't had time to identify, much less take care of, our own problems.
Many professionals say the first step toward change is awareness. The second step is acceptance. 1 With that in mind,
let's examine the characteristics of codependency. These characteristics have been compiled from my entire bibliographyand from my personal and professional experience.
Caretaking
Codependents may:
· think and feel responsible for other peoplefor other people's feelings, thoughts, actions, choices, wants, needs, well-
being, lack of well-being, and ultimate destiny.· feel anxiety, pity, and guilt when other people have a problem.
 
page_42
Page 43
· feel compelledalmost forcedto help that person solve the problem, such as offering unwanted advice, giving a rapid-fire
series of suggestions, or fixing feelings.· feel angry when their help isn't effective.
· anticipate other people's needs.
· wonder why others don't do the same for them.
· find themselves saying yes when they mean no, doing things they don't really want to be doing, doing more than their
fair share of the work, and doing things other people are capable of doing for themselves.
· not know what they want and need or, if they do, tell themselves what they want and need is not important.
· try to please others instead of themselves.
· find it easier to feel and express anger about injustices done to others, rather than injustices done to themselves.
· feel safest when giving.
· feel insecure and guilty when somebody gives to them.
· feel sad because they spend their whole lives giving to other people and nobody gives to them.
· find themselves attracted to needy people.
· find needy people attracted to them.
· feel bored, empty, and worthless if they don't have a crisis in their lives, a problem to solve, or someone to help.
· abandon their routine to respond to or do something for somebody else.
· overcommit themselves.
· feel harried and pressured.
· believe deep inside other people are somehow responsible for them.
· blame others for the spot the codependents are in.
· say other people make the codependents feel the way they do.
· believe other people are making them crazy.
· feel angry, victimized, unappreciated, and used.
· find other people become impatient or angry with them for all the preceding characteristics.
 
page_43
Page 44
Low Self-Worth
Codependents tend to:
· come from troubled, repressed, or dysfunctional families.
· deny their family was troubled, repressed, or dysfunctional.
· blame themselves for everything.
· pick on themselves for everything, including the way they think, feel, look, act, and behave.
· get angry, defensive, self-righteous, and indignant when others blame and criticize the codependentssomething
codependents regularly do to themselves.· reject compliments or praise.
· get depressed from a lack of compliments and praise (stroke deprivation).
· feel different from the rest of the world.
· think they're not quite good enough.
· feel guilty about spending money on themselves or doing unnecessary or fun things for themselves.
· fear rejection.
· take things personally.
· have been victims of sexual, physical, or emotional abuse, neglect, abandonment, or alcoholism.
· feel like victims.
· tell themselves they can't do anything right.
· be afraid of making mistakes.
· wonder why they have a tough time making decisions.
· expect themselves to do everything perfectly.
· wonder why they can't get anything done to their satisfaction.
· have a lot of "shoulds."
· feel a lot of guilt.
· feel ashamed of who they are.
· think their lives aren't worth living.
· try to help other people live their lives instead.
 
page_44
Page 45
· get artificial feelings of self-worth from helping others.
· get strong feelings of low self-worthembarrassment, failure, etc.from other people's failures and problems.
· wish good things would happen to them.
· believe good things never will happen.
· believe they don't deserve good things and happiness.
· wish other people would like and love them.
· believe other people couldn't possibly like and love them
· try to prove they're good enough for other people.
· settle for being needed.
Repression
Many codependents:
· push their thoughts and feelings out of their awareness because of fear and guilt.
· become afraid to let themselves be who they are
· appear rigid and controlled.
Obsession
Codependents tend to:
· feel terribly anxious about problems and people.
· worry about the silliest things.
· think and talk a lot about other people.
· lose sleep over problems or other people's behavior.
· worry.
· never find answers.
· check on people.
· try to catch people in acts of misbehavior.
· feel unable to quit talking, thinking, and worrying about other people or problems.
 
page_45
Page 46
· abandon their routine because they are so upset about somebody or something.
· focus all their energy on other people and problems.
· wonder why they never have any energy.
· wonder why they can't get things done.
Controlling
Many codependents:
· have lived through events and with people that were out of control, causing the codependents sorrow and
disappointment.· become afraid to let other people be who they are and allow events to happen naturally.
· don't see or deal with their fear of loss of control.
· think they know best how things should turn out and how people should behave.
· try to control events and people through helplessness, guilt, coercion, threats, advice-giving, manipulation, or
domination.· eventually fail in their efforts or provoke people's anger.
· get frustrated and angry.
· feel controlled by events and people.
DenialCodependents tend to:
· ignore problems or pretend they aren't happening.
· pretend circumstances aren't as bad as they are.
tell themselves things will be better tomorrow.
· 
· stay busy so they don't have to think about things.
· get confused.
· get depressed or sick.
 
page_46
Page 47
· go to doctors and get tranquilizers.
· become workaholics.
· spend money compulsively.
· overeat.
· pretend those things aren't happening, either.
· watch problems get worse.
· believe lies.
· lie to themselves.
· wonder why they feel like they're going crazy.
Dependency
Many codependents:
· don't feel happy, content, or peaceful with themselves.
· look for happiness outside themselves.
· latch onto whoever or whatever they think can provide happiness.
· feel terribly threatened by the loss of any thing or person they think provides their happiness.
· didn't feel love and approval from their parents.
· don't love themselves.
· believe other people can't or don't love them.
· desperately seek love and approval.
· often seek love from people incapable of loving.
· believe other people are never there for them.
· equate love with pain.
· feel they need people more than they want them.
· try to prove they're good enough to be loved.
· don't take time to see if other people are good for them.
· worry whether other people love or like them.
· don't take time to figure out if they love or like other people.
· center their lives around other people.
· ook to relationships to provide all their good feelings.
 
page_47
Page 48
· lose interest in their own lives when they love.
· worry other people will leave them.
· don't believe they can take care of themselves.
· stay in relationships that don't work.
· tolerate abuse to keep people loving them.
· feel trapped in relationships.
· leave bad relationships and form new ones that don't work either.
· wonder if they will ever find love.
Poor Communication
Codependents frequently
· blame.
· threaten.
· coerce.
· beg.
· bribe.
· advise.
· don't say what they mean.
· don't mean what they say.
· don't know what they mean.
· don't take themselves seriously.
· think other people don't take the codependents seriously.
· take themselves too seriously.
· ask for what they want and need indirectlysighing, for example.
· find it difficult to get to the point.
· aren't sure what the point is.
· gauge their words carefully to achieve a desired effect.
· try to say what they think will please people.
· try to say what they think will provoke people.
· try to say what they hope will make people do what they want them to do.
 
page_48
Page 49
· eliminate the word no from their vocabulary.
· talk too much.
· talk about other people.
· avoid talking about themselves, their problems, feelings, and thoughts.
· say everything is their fault.
· say nothing is their fault.
· believe their opinions don't matter.
· wait to express their opinions until they know other people's opinions.
· lie to protect and cover up for people they love
· lie to protect themselves.
· have a difficult time asserting their rights.
· have a difficult time expressing their emotions honestly, openly, and appropriately.
· think most of what they have to say is unimportant.
· begin to talk in cynical, self-degrading, or hostile ways,
· apologize for bothering people.
Weak Boundaries
Codependents frequently.
· say they won't tolerate certain behaviors from other people.
· gradually increase their tolerance until they can tolerate and do things they said they never would.
· let others hurt them.
· keep letting people hurt them.
· wonder why they hurt so badly.
· complain, blame, and try to control while they continue to stand there.
· finally get angry.
· become totally intolerant.
 
page_49
Page 50
Lack of Trust
Codependents:
· don't trust themselves.
· don't trust their feelings.
· don't trust their decisions.
· don't trust other people.
· try to trust untrustworthy people.
· think God has abandoned them.
· lose faith and trust in God.
Anger
Many codependents:
· feel very scared, hurt, and angry.
· live with people who are very scared, hurt, and angry.
· are afraid of their own anger.
· are frightened of other people's anger.
· think people will go away if anger enters the picture
· think other people make them feel angry.
· are afraid to make other people feel anger.
· feel controlled by other people's anger.
· repress their angry feelings.
· cry a lot, get depressed, overeat, get sick, do mean and nasty things to get even, act hostile, or have violent temper
outbursts.· punish other people for making the codependents angry.
· have been shamed for feeling angry.
· place guilt and shame on themselves for feeling angry.
· feel increasing amounts of anger, resentment, and bitterness.
· feel safer with their anger than with hurt feelings.
· wonder if they'll ever not be angry.
 
page_50
Page 51
Sex ProblemsSome codependents:
· are caretakers in the bedroom.
· have sex when they don't want to.
· have sex when they'd rather be held, nurtured, and loved.
· try to have sex when they're angry or hurt.
· refuse to enjoy sex because they're so angry at their partner.
· are afraid of losing control.
· have a difficult time asking for what they need in bed.
· withdraw emotionally from their partner.
· feel sexual revulsion toward their partner.
· don't talk about it.
· force themselves to have sex, anyway.
· reduce sex to a technical act.
· wonder why they don't enjoy sex.
· lose interest in sex.
· make up reasons to abstain.
· wish their sex partner would die, go away, or sense the codependent's feelings.
· have strong sexual fantasies about other people.
· consider or have an extramarital affair.
Miscellaneous
Codependents tend to:
· be extremely responsible.
· be extremely irresponsible.
· become martyrs, sacrificing their happiness and that of others for causes that don't require sacrifice.
· find it difficult to feel close to people.
· find it difficult to have fun and be spontaneous.
 
page_51
Page 52
· have an overall passive response to codependencycrying, hurt, helplessness.
· have an overall aggressive response to codependencyviolence, anger, dominance.
· combine passive and aggressive responses.
· vacillate in decisions and emotions.
· laugh when they feel like crying.
· stay loyal to their compulsions and people even when it hurts.
· be ashamed about family, personal, or relationship problems.
· be confused about the nature of the problem.
· cover up, lie, and protect the problem.
· not seek help because they tell themselves the problem isn't bad enough, or they aren't important enough.
· wonder why the problem doesn't go away.
Progressive
In the later stages of codependency, codependents may:
· feel lethargic.
· feel depressed.
· become withdrawn and isolated.
· experience a complete loss of daily routine and structure.
· abuse or neglect their children and other responsibilities.
· feel hopeless.
· begin to plan their escape from a relationship they feel trapped in.
· think about suicide.
· become violent.
· become seriously emotionally, mentally, or physically ill.
· experience an eating disorder (over- or undereating).
· become addicted to alcohol and other drugs.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
 
page_52
Page 53
The preceding checklist is long but not all-inclusive. Like other people, codependents do, feel, and think many things.
There are not a certain number of traits that guarantees whether a person is or isn't codependent. Each person is different;each person has his or her way of doing things. I'm just trying to paint a picture. The interpretation, or decision, is up toyou. What's most important is that you first identify behaviors or areas that cause you problems, and then decide whatyou want to do.
At the end of Chapter Three, I asked you to define codependency. As Earnie Larsen says, if you defined your problem as,
''living with an alcoholic,'' you may think not living with an alcoholic is the solution to your problem. That may bepartially correct. But our real problems as codependents are our own characteristicsour codependent behaviors.
Who's codependent? I am.An estimated 80 million people are chemically dependent or in a relationship with someone who is. 2 They are probably
codependent.
People who love, care about, or work with troubled people may be codependent.
People who care about people with eating disorders are probably codependent. In her book, Fat Is a Family Affair, Judi
Hollis wrote that one eating disorder person can keep fifteen to twenty codependents busy. 3 Many people with eating
disorders are codependents, too. "In an informal survey, I discovered at least 40 percent of the wives of alcoholics were
obese," Hollis wrote. 4
You may be reading this book for yourself; you may be codependent. Or, you may be reading this book to help someoneelse; if so, you probably are codependent. If concern has turned into obsession; if compassion has turned into caretaking;if you are taking care of other people and not taking care of yourselfyou may be in trouble with codependency. Eachperson must decide for him- or herself if codependency is a problem. Each person must decide for him- or herself whatneeds to be changed and when that should happen.
Codependency is many things. It is a dependency on peopleon their moods, behaviors, sickness or well-being, and their
love. It is a paradoxical dependency. 5 Codependents appear to be depended upon, but
 
page_53
Page 54
they are dependent. They look strong but feel helpless. They appear controlling but in reality are controlled themselves,sometimes by an illness such as alcoholism.
These are the issues that dictate recovery. It is solving these problems that makes recovery fun. Many recoveries from
problems that involve a person's mind, emotions, and spirit are long and grueling. Not so, here. Except for normal humanemotions we would be feeling anyway, and twinges of discomfort as we begin to behave differently, recovery fromcodependency is exciting. It is liberating. It lets us be who we are. It lets other people be who they are. It helps us ownour God-given power to think, feel, and act. It feels good. It brings peace. It enables us to love ourselves and others. Itallows us to receive lovesome of the good stuff we've all been looking for. It provides an optimum environment for thepeople around us to get and stay healthy. And recovery helps stop the unbearable pain many of us have been living with.
Recovery is not only fun, it is simple. It is not always easy, but it is simple. It is based on a premise many of us have
forgotten or never learned: Each person is responsible for him- or herself. It involves learning one new behavior that wewill devote ourselves to: taking care of ourselves. In the second half of this book, we'll discuss specific ideas for doingthat.
Activity
1. Go through the checklist in this chapter. Mark each characteristic with a 0 if it is never a problem for you. Mark the
characteristic with a 1 if it is occasionally a problem. And mark it with a 2 if it is frequently a problem. Later, in anotherchapter, you will use this to establish goals. You may wish to use it now as a guide to the chapters you want to read.
2. How do you feel about changing yourself? What do you think would happen if you began to change? Do you think you
can change? Why or why not? Write several paragraphs answering these questions.
 
page_54
Page 55
PART II:THE BASICS OF SELF-CARE
 
page_55
Page 57
5
Detachment
It (detachment ) is not detaching from the person whom we care about, but from the agony of involvement 1
Al-Anon member
When I was trying to choose the topic for the first chapter in this section of the book, many subjects competed for first
place. I chose detachment not because it is significantly more important than the other concepts. I selected it because it isan underlying concept. It is something we need to do frequently, as we strive to live happy lives. It is the goal of mostrecovery programs for codependents. And, it is also something we must do firstbefore we can do the other things we needto do. We cannot begin to work on ourselves, to live our own lives, feel our own feelings, and solve our own problemsuntil we have detached from the object of our obsession. From my experiences (and those of others), it appears that evenour Higher Power can't do much with us until we have detached.
Attachment
When a codependent says, "I think I'm getting attached to you," look out! He or she probably means it.Most codependents are attached to the people and problems in their environments. By "attachment," I don't mean normal
feelings of liking people, being concerned about problems, or feeling connected to the world. Attachment is becomingoverly-involved, sometimes hopelessly entangled.
 
page_57
Page 58
Attachment can take several forms:
· We may become excessively worried about, and preoccupied with, a problem or person (our mental energy is
attached).
· Or, we may graduate to becoming obsessed with and controlling of the people and problems in our environment (our
mental, physical, and emotional energy is directed at the object of our obsession).· We may become reactionaries, instead of acting authentically of our own volition (our mental, emotional, and physical
energy is attached).· We may become emotionally dependent on the people around us (now we're really attached).
· We may become caretakers (rescuers, enablers) to the people around us (firmly attaching ourselves to their need for
us).
The problems with attachment are many. (In this chapter I will focus on worry and obsession. In following chapters I
will cover the other forms of attachment.) Overinvolvement of any sort can keep us in a state of chaos; it can keep thepeople around us in a state of chaos. If we're focusing all our energies on people and problems, we have little left for thebusiness of living our own lives. And, there is just so much worry and responsibility in the air. If we take it all onourselves, there is none left for the people around us. It overworks us and underworks them. Furthermore, worrying aboutpeople and problems doesn't help. It doesn't solve problems, it doesn't help other people, and it doesn't help us. It iswasted energy.
"If you believe that feeling bad or worrying long enough will change a fact, then you are residing on another planet with
a different reality system," wrote Dr. Wayne W Dyer in Your Erroneous Zones. 2
Worrying and obsessing keep us so tangled in our heads we can't solve our problems. Whenever we become attached in
these ways to someone or something, we become detached from ourselves. We lose touch with ourselves. We forfeit ourpower and ability to think, feel, act, and take care of ourselves. We lose control.
 
page_58
Page 59
Obsession with another human being, or a problem, is an awful thing to be caught up in. Have you ever seen someone
who is obsessed with someone or something? That person can talk about nothing else, can think of nothing else. Even if
he appears to be listening when you talk, you know that person doesn't hear you. His mind is tossing and turning,crashing and banging, around and around on an endless racetrack of compulsive thought. He is preoccupied. He relateswhatever you say, no matter how unrelated it actually is, to the object of his obsession. He says the same things, over andover, sometimes changing the wording slightly, sometimes using the same words. Nothing you say makes any difference.Even telling him to stop doesn't help. He probably would if he could. The problem is he can't (at that moment). He isbursting with the jarring energy that obsession is made of. He has a problem or a concern that is not only bothering himitis controlling him.
Many of the people I've worked with in family groups have been that obsessed with people they care about. When I
asked them what they were feeling, they told me what the other person was feeling. When I asked what they did, theytold me what the other person had done. Their entire focus was on someone or something other than themselves. Some ofthem had spent years of their lives doing thisworrying about, reacting to, and trying to control other human beings. Theywere shells, sometimes almost invisible shells, of people. Their energy was depleteddirected at someone else. Theycouldn't tell me what they were feeling and thinking because they didn't know. Their focus was not on themselves.
Maybe you've been obsessed with someone or something. Someone does or says something. A thought occurs to you.
Something reminds you of a past event. A problem enters your awareness. Something happens or doesn't happen. Or yousense something's happening, but you're not sure what. He doesn't call, and he usually calls by now. He doesn't answerthe phone, and he should. It's payday. In the past he always got drunk on payday. He's only been sober three months.Will it happen again today? You may not know what, you may not know why, and you're
 
page_59
Page 60
not sure when, but you know  something badsomething terriblehas happened, is happening, or is about to happen.
It hits you in the stomach. The feeling fills you upthat gut-twisting, handwringing anxiety that is so familiar to
codependents. It is what causes us to do much of what we do that hurts ourselves; it is the substance worry and obsessionfeed upon. It is fear at its worst. Fear usually comes and goes, leaving us in flight, ready to fight, or just temporarilyfrightened. But anxiety hangs in there. It grips the mind, paralyzing it for all but its own purposesan endless rehashing ofthe same useless thoughts. It is the fuel that propels us into controlling behaviors of all sorts. We can think of nothing butkeeping a lid on things, controlling the problem, and making it go away; it is the stuff codependency is made of.
When you're obsessed, you can't get your mind off that person or that problem. You don't know what you are feeling.
You didn't know what you were thinking. You're not even sure what you should do, but by God, you should dosomething! And fast!
Worrying, obsessing, and controlling are illusions. They are tricks we play on ourselves. We feel like we are doing
something to solve our problems, but we're not. Many of us have reacted this way with justifiably good reason. We mayhave lived with serious, complicated problems that have disrupted our lives, and they would provoke any normal personto become anxious, upset, worried, and obsessed. We may love someone who is in troublesomeone who's out of control.His or her problem may be alcoholism, an eating disorder, gambling, a mental or emotional problem, or any combinationof these.
Some of us may be living with less serious problems, but they concern us anyway. People we love or care about may
have mood swings. They may do things we wish they wouldn't do. We may think he or she should do things differently,a better way, a way that we believe wouldn't cause so many problems.
Out of habit, some of us may have developed an attitude of attachmentof worrying, reacting, and obsessively trying to
control. Maybe we have lived with people and through events that were out of control.
 
page_60
Page 61
Maybe obsessing and controlling is the way we kept things in balance or temporarily kept things from getting worse.
And then we just kept on doing it. Maybe we're afraid to let go, because when we let go in the past, terrible, hurtful
things happened.
Maybe we've been attached to peopleliving their lives for and through themfor so long that we don't have any life of our
own left to live. It's safer to stay attached. At least we know we're alive if we're reacting. At least we've got something todo if we're obsessing or controlling.
For various reasons codependents tend to attach themselves to problems and people. Never mind that worrying isn't
solving anything. Never mind that those problems rarely have solutions. Never mind that they're so obsessed they can'tread a book, watch television, or go for a walk. Never mind that their emotions are constantly in turmoil over what shesaid or didn't say, what she did or didn't do, or what she will do next. Never mind that the things we're doing aren'thelping anyone! No matter what the cost, we will hang on. We will grit our teeth, clutch the rope, and grab more tightlythan ever.
Some of us may not even be aware we've been holding on so tightly. Some of us may have convinced ourselves we have
to hang on this tightly. We believe there is simply no other choice but to react to this particular problem or person in thisobsessive manner. Frequently, when I suggest to people that they detach from a person or problem, they recoil in horror."Oh, no!" they say. "I could never do that. I love him, or her, too much. I care too much to do that. This problem orperson is too important to me. I have to stay attached!"
My answer to that is, "WHO SAYS YOU HAVE TO?"I've got newsgood news. We don't "have to." There's a better way. It's called "detachment." 3 It may be scary at first, but
it will ultimately work better for everyone involved.
A Better Way
Exactly what is detachment? What am I asking of you? (The term, as you may have guessed, is more jargon.)
 
page_61
Page 62
First, let's discuss what detachment isn't. Detachment is not a cold, hostile withdrawal; a resigned, despairing acceptance
of anything life and people throw our way; a robotical walk through life oblivious to, and totally unaffected by peopleand problems; a Pollyanna-like ignorant bliss; a shirking of our true  responsibilities to ourselves and others; a severing of
our relationships. Nor is it a removal of our love and concern, although sometimes these ways of detaching might be thebest we can do, for the moment.
Ideally, detachment is releasing, or detaching from, a person or problem in love. We mentally, emotionally, and
sometimes physically disengage ourselves from unhealthy (and frequently painful) entanglements with another person'slife and responsibilities, and from problems we cannot solve, according to a handout, entitled "Detachment," that hasbeen passed around Al-Anon groups for years.
Detachment is based on the premises that each person is responsible for himself, that we can't solve problems that aren't
ours to solve, and that worrying doesn't help. We adopt a policy of keeping our hands off other people's responsibilitiesand tend to our own instead. If people have created some disasters for themselves, we allow them to face their ownproverbial music. We allow people to be who they are. We give them the freedom to be responsible and to grow. And wegive ourselves that same freedom. We live our own lives to the best of our ability. We strive to ascertain what it is wecan change and what we cannot change. Then we 1`stop trying to change things we can't. We do what we can to solve aproblem, and then we stop fretting and stewing. If we cannot solve a problem and we have done what we could, we learnto live with, or in spite of, that problem. And we try to live happilyfocusing heroically on what is good in our lives today,and feeling grateful for that. We learn the magical lesson that making the most of what we have turns it into more.
Detachment involves "present moment living"living in the here and now. We allow life to happen instead of forcing and
trying to control it. We relinquish regrets over the past and fears about the future. We make the most of each day.
 
page_62
Page 63
Detachment also involves accepting realitythe facts. It requires faithin ourselves, in God, in other people, and in the
natural order and destiny of things in this world. We believe in the rightness and appropriateness of each moment. Werelease our burdens and cares, and give ourselves the freedom to enjoy life in spite of our unsolved problems. We trustthat all is well in spite of the conflicts. We trust that Someone greater than ourselves knows, has ordained, and caresabout what is happening. We understand that this Someone can do much more to solve the problem than we can. So wetry to stay out of His way and let Him do it. In time, we know  that all is well because we see how the strangest (and
sometimes most painful) things work out for the best and for the benefit of everyone.
Judi Hollis wrote of detachment in a section on codependency in her book, Fat Is a Family Affair. There she described
detachment as "a healthy neutrality." 4
Detaching does not mean we don't care. It means we learn to love, care, and be involved without going crazy. We stop
creating all this chaos in our minds and environments. When we are not anxiously and compulsively thrashing about, webecome able to make good decisions about how to love people, and how to solve our problems. We become free to careand to love in ways that help others and don't hurt ourselves. 5
The rewards from detachment are great: serenity; a deep sense of peace; the ability to give and receive love in self-enhancing, energizing ways; and the freedom to find real solutions to our problems. We find the freedom to live our ownlives without excessive feelings of guilt about, or responsibility toward others. 6 Sometimes detachment even motivates
and frees people around us to begin to solve their problems. We stop worrying about them, and they pick up the slackand finally start worrying about themselves. What a grand plan! We each mind our own business.
Earlier, I described a person caught in the entanglement of obsessions and worry. I have known many people who have
had to (or have chosen to) live with serious problems such as an alcoholic spouse who never sobered up, a severelyhandicapped child, and a teenager hell-bent
 
page_63
Page 64
on destroying himself through drugs and criminal behavior. These people learned to live with, and in spite of, their
problems. They grieved for their losses, then found a way to live their lives not in resignation, martyrdom, and despair,but with enthusiasm, peace, and a true sense of gratitude for that which was good. They took care of their actualresponsibilities. They gave to people, they helped people, and they loved people. But they also gave to and lovedthemselves. They held themselves in high esteem. They didn't do these things perfectly, or without effort, or instantly.But they strived to do these things, and they learned to do them well.
I owe a debt of gratitude to these people. They taught me that detachment was possible. They showed me it could work. I
would like to pass that same hope on to you. It is my wish that you will find other people to pass that hope on to, fordetachment is real and thrives with reinforcement and nurturing.
Detachment is both an act and an art. It is a way of life. I believe it is also a gift. And it will be given to those who seek
it.
How do we detach? How do we extricate our emotions, mind, body, and spirit from the agony of entanglement? As best
we can. And, probably, a bit clumsily at first. An old AA. and Al-Anon saying suggests a three-part formula called''HOW'': Honesty, Openness, and Willingness to try. 7
In the chapters ahead, I will discuss some specific concepts for detaching from certain forms of attachment. Many of the
other concepts I will discuss later will lead to detachment. You will have to decide how these ideas apply to you and yourparticular situation and then find your own path. With a little humility, surrender, and effort on your part, I believe youcan do it. I believe detachment can become a habitual response, in the same manner that obsessing, worrying, andcontrolling became habitual responsesby practice. You may not do it perfectly, but no one has. However, and at whateverpace, you practice detachment in your life, I believe it will be right for you. I hope you will be able to detach with lovefor the person or persons you are detaching from. I think it is better to do everything in an attitude of love. However, fora variety of reasons, we can't always do that. If you can't detach in love, it
 
page_64
Page 65
is my opinion that it is better to detach in anger rather than to stay attached. If we are detached, we are in a better position
to work on (or through) our resentful emotions. If we're attached, we probably won't do anything other than stay upset.
When should we detach? When we can't stop thinking, talking about, or worrying about someone or something; when
our emotions are churning and boiling; when we feel like we have to do something about someone because we can't standit another minute; when we're hanging on by a thread, and it feels like that single thread is frayed; and when we believewe can no longer live with the problem we've been trying to live with. It is time to detach! You will learn to recognizewhen detachment is advisable. A good rule of thumb is: You need to detach most when it seems the least likely orpossible thing to do.
I'll close this chapter with a true story. One night about midnight my telephone rang. I was in bed and wondered, as I
picked up the receiver, who was calling me at that hour. I thought it had to be an emergency.
In a way it was an emergency. It was a stranger. She had been calling various friends all evening, trying to find some
kind of consolation. Apparently, she hadn't been able to find it. Someone had given her someone else's phone number,that person had given her someone else's phone number, and the last person had suggested she call me.
Immediately upon introducing herself, the woman exploded in a tirade. Her husband used to go to Alcoholics
Anonymous. He had separated from her, and now he was seeing another woman because he wanted to "find himself."Furthermore, before he left her, he had been acting really crazy and didn't go to meetings. And she wondered, isn't heacting crazy now by dating a woman who is that much younger than him?
I was speechless at first, then found it hard to find a chance to talk. She went on and on. Finally she asked, "Don't you
think he's sick? Don't you think he's acting crazy? Don't you think something should be done about him?"
"That could be," I replied. "But obviously I can't do it, and neither can you. I'm more concerned about you. What are you
feeling? What do you  think? What do you need to do to take care of yourself?"
 
page_65
Page 66
I shall say the same thing to you, dear reader. I know you have problems. I understand that many of you are deeplygrieved over, and concerned about, certain people in your lives. Many of them may be destroying themselves, you, andyour family, right before your eyes. But I can't do anything to control those people; and you probably can't either. If youcould, you probably would have done it by now.
Detach. Detach in love, or detach in anger, but strive for detachment. I know it's difficult, but it will become easier with
practice. If you can't let go completely, try to "hang on loose." 8 Relax. Sit back. Now, take a deep breath. The focus ison you.
Activity
1. Is there a problem or person in your life that you are excessively worried about? Write about that person or problem.
Write as much as you need to write to get it out of your system. When you have written all you need to write about thatperson or problem, focus on yourself. What are you thinking? What are you feeling?
2. How do you feel about detaching from that person or problem? What might happen if you detach? Will that probably
happen anyway? How has staying "attached"worrying, obsessing, trying to controlhelped so far?
3. If you did not have that person or problem in your life, what would you be doing with your life that is different from
what you are doing now? How would you be feeling and behaving? Spend a few minutes visualizing yourself living yourlife, feeling and behaving that wayin spite of your unsolved problem. Visualize your hands placing in God's hands theperson or problem you are concerned about. 9 Visualize His hands gently and lovingly holding that person or willingly
accepting that problem. Now, visualize His hands holding you. All is well for the moment. All is as it should and as it
needs to be. All will be wellbetter than you think.
 
page_66
Page 67
6 
Don't Be Blown About by Every Wind
Easy Does It. Twelve Step program slogan
I am a reactionary.That thought burned deeply into my consciousness one day while I was sitting in my office. I had heard people discuss
reacting, but until that moment I didn't understand how much I reacted.
I reacted to other people's feelings, behaviors, problems, and thoughts. I reacted to what they might be feeling, thinking,
or doing. I reacted to my own feelings, my own thoughts, my own problems. My strong point seemed to be reacting tocrisesI thought almost everything was a crisis. I overreacted. Hidden panic (which bordered on hysteria) brewed in memuch of the time. I sometimes underreacted. If the problem I faced was significant, I often used the tool of denial. Ireacted to almost everything that came into my awareness and environment. My entire life had been a reaction to otherpeople's lives, desires, problems, faults, successes, and personalities. Even my low self-worth, which I dragged aroundlike a bag of stinking garbage, had been a reaction. I was like a puppet with strings hanging out, inviting and allowinganyone or anything to yank them.
Most codependents are reactionaries. We react with anger, guilt, shame, self-hate, worry, hurt, controlling gestures,
caretaking acts, depression, desperation, and fury. We react with fear and anxiety. Some of us react so much it is painfulto be around people, and torturous to be
 
page_67
Page 68
in large groups of people. It is normal to react and respond to our environment. Reacting is part of life. It's part of
interacting, and it's part of being alive and human. But we allow ourselves to get so upset, and so distracted. Little things,big thingsanythinghave the power to throw us off the track. And the way we respond after we react is frequently not inour best interests.
We may have started reacting and responding urgently and compulsively in patterns that hurt us. Just feeling urgent and
compulsive is enough to hurt us. We keep ourselves in a crisis stateadrenaline flowing and muscles tensed, ready to reactto emergencies that usually aren't emergencies. Someone does something, so we must do something back. Someone sayssomething, so we must say something back. Someone feels a certain way, so we must feel a certain way. WE JUMPINTO THE FIRST FEELING THAT COMES OUR WAY AND THEN WALLOW IN IT. We think the first thought thatcomes into our heads and then elaborate on it. We say the first words on our tongues and sometimes regret them. We dothe first thing that comes to mind, usually without thinking about it. That is the problem: we are reacting withoutthinkingwithout honest thought about what we need to do, and how we want to handle the situation. Our emotions andbehaviors are being controlledtriggered by everyone and everything in our environment. We are indirectly allowingothers to tell us what to do. That means we have lost control. We are being controlled.
When we react we forfeit our personal, God-given power to think, feel, and behave in our best interests. We allow others
to determine when we will be happy; when we will be peaceful; when we will be upset; and what we will say, do, think,and feel. We forfeit our right to feel peaceful at the whim of our environments. We are like a wisp of paper in athunderstorm, blown about by every wind.
Here is an example of a way I tend to react (one of many): My office is in my home, and I have two young children.
Sometimes when I'm working they start going wild in the other roomsfighting, running, messing up the house, and eatingand drinking everything in the kitchen. My first, instinctive reaction is to screech at them to, "Stop that!" My
 
page_68
Page 69
second reaction is to holler some more. It comes naturally. Reacting that way appears to be easier than leaving my office,
working my way through the laundry room, and walking upstairs. It also appears easier than taking the time to thinkabout how I want to handle the situation. The problem is: bellowing and screaming do not work. It is not really easier. Itmakes my throat sore and teaches the children how to make me sit in my office and screech.
Reacting usually does not work. We react too quickly, with too much intensity and urgency. Rarely can we do our best at
anything in this state of mind. I believe the irony is that we are not called upon or required to do things in this state ofmind. There is little in our lives we need to do that we cannot do better if we are peaceful. Few situationsno matter howgreatly they appear to demand itcan be bettered by us going berserk.
Why do we do it, then?We react because we're anxious and afraid of what has happened, what might happen, and what is happening.Many of us react as though everything is a crisis because we have lived with so many crises for so long that crisis
reaction has become a habit.
We react because we think things shouldn't be happening the way they are.We react because we don't feel good about ourselves.We react because most people react.We react because we think we have to react.We don't have to.We don't have to be so afraid of people. They are just people like us.We don't have to forfeit our peace. It doesn't help. We have the same facts and resources available to us when we're
peaceful that are available to us when we're frantic and chaotic. Actually we have more resources available because ourminds and emotions are free to perform at peak level.
We don't have to forfeit our power to think and feel for anyone or anything. That is also not required of us.
 
page_69
Page 70
We don't have to take things so seriously ( ourselves, events, and other people). We blow things out of proportionour
feelings, thoughts, actions, and mistakes. We do the same thing with other people's feelings, thoughts, and actions. We
tell ourselves things are awful, terrible, a tragedy, and the end of the world. Many things might be sad, too bad, andunpleasantbut the only thing that's the end of the world is the end of the world. Feelings are important, but they're onlyfeelings. Thoughts are important, but they're only thoughtsand we all think a lot of different things, and our thoughts aresubject to change. What we say and do is important, what others say and do is important, but the world doesn't hinge onany particular speech or action. And if it is particularly important that something gets done or said, don't worry: It'llhappen. Lighten up. Give yourself and others room to move, to talk, to be who they areto be human. Give life a chanceto happen. Give yourself an opportunity to enjoy it.
We don't have to take other people's behaviors as reflections of our self-worth. We don't have to be embarrassed if
someone we love chooses to behave inappropriately. It's normal to react that way, but we don't have to continue to feelembarrassed and less than if someone else continues to behave inappropriately. Each person is responsible for his or herbehavior. If another person behaves inappropriately, let him or her feel embarrassed for him- or herself. If you have donenothing to feel embarrassed about, don't feel embarrassed. I know this is a tough concept, but it can be mastered.
We don't have to take rejection as a reflection of our self-worth. If somebody who is important (or even someone
unimportant) to you rejects you or your choices, you are still real, and you are still worth every bit as much as you would
be if you had not been rejected. Feel any feelings that go with rejection; talk about your thoughts; but don't forfeit your
self-esteem to another's disapproval or rejection of who you are or what you have done. Even if the most importantperson in your world rejects you, you are still real, and you are still okay. If you have done something inappropriate oryou need to solve a problem or change a behavior, then take appropriate steps to take care of yourself. But don't rejectyourself,
 
page_70
Page 71
and don't give so much power to other people's rejection of you. It isn't necessary.
We don't have to take things so personally. We take things to heart that we have no business taking to heart. For instance,
saying "If you loved me you wouldn't drink" to an alcoholic makes as much sense as saying "If you loved me, youwouldn't cough" to someone who has pneumonia. Pneumonia victims will cough until they get appropriate treatment fortheir illness. Alcoholics will drink until they get the same. When people with a compulsive disorder do whatever it is theyare compelled to do, they are not saying they don't love youthey are saying they don't love themselves.
We don't have to take little things personally either. If someone has a bad day or gets angry, don't assume it has
something to do with you. It may or may not have something to do with you. If it does you'll find out. Usually thingshave far less to do with us than we think.
An interruption, someone else's bad mood, sharp tongue, bad day, negative thoughts, problems, or active alcoholism does
not have to run or ruin our lives, our day, or even an hour of our day. If people don't want to be with us or act healthy, itis not a reflection on our self-worth. It reflects on their present circumstances. By practicing detachment we can lessenour destructive reactions to the world around us. Separate yourself from things. Leave things alone, and let people bewho they are. Who are you to say that the interruption, mood, word, bad day, thought, or problem is not an important andnecessary part of life? Who are you to say that this problem won't ultimately be beneficial to you or someone else?
We don't have to react. We have options. That is the joy of recovery from codependency. And each time we exercise our
right to choose how we want to act, think, feel, and behave, we feel better and stronger.
"But," you might protest, "why shouldn't I react? Why shouldn't I say something back? Why shouldn't I be upset? He or
she deserves to bear the brunt of my turmoil." That may be, but you don't. We're talking here about your lack of peace,your lack of serenity, your wasted moments. As Ralph Edwards used to say, ''This is your life." How do you
 
page_71
Page 72
want to spend it? You're not detaching for him or her. You're detaching for you. Chances are everyone will benefit by it.
We are like singers in a large chorus. If the guy next to us gets off key, must we? Wouldn't it help him, and us, more to
strive to stay on key? We can learn to hold our part.
We don't need to eliminate all our reactions to people and problems. Reactions can be useful. They help us identify what
we like and what feels good. They help us identify problems in and around us. But most of us react too much. And muchof what we react to is nonsense. It isn't all that important, and it doesn't merit the time and attention we're giving it. Someof what we react to is other people's reactions to us. (I'm mad because he got mad; he got mad because I was angry; I wasangry because I thought he was angry with me; he wasn't angry, he was hurt because . . . )
Our reactions can be such a chain reaction that frequently everyone's upset and nobody knows why. They're just upset.
Then, everyone's out of control and being controlled. Sometimes people behave in certain ways to provoke us to react incertain ways. If we stop reacting in these certain ways, we take all the fun out of it for them. We remove ourselves fromtheir control and take away their power over us.
Sometimes our reactions provoke other people to react in certain ways. We help them justify certain behaviors. (We don't
need any more of that, do we?) Sometimes reacting narrows our vision so much that we get stuck reacting to symptoms
of problems. We may stay so busy reacting we never have the time or energy to identify the real problem, much less
figure out how to solve it. We can spend years reacting to each drinking incident and resulting crisis, completely failing
to recognize that the true problem is alcoholism! Learn to stop reacting in ways that aren't necessary and don't work.Eliminate the reactions that hurt you.
Some suggestions follow to help you detach from people and your destructive reactions to them. These are only
suggestions. There is no precise formula for detachment. You need to find your own way, a way that works for you.
 
page_72
Page 73
1. Learn to recognize when you're reacting, when you are allowing someone or something to yank your strings. Usually
when you start to feel anxious, afraid, indignant, outraged, rejected, sorry for yourself, ashamed, worried, or confused,something in your environment has snagged you. (I'm not saying it's wrong to feel these feelings. Probably anybodywould feel that way. The difference is, we're learning to decide how long we want to feel that way, and what we want todo about it.) Using the words "he or it or she made me feel" often indicates we are reacting. Losing our sense of peaceand serenity is probably the strongest indication that we are caught up in some sort of reaction.
2. Make yourself comfortable. When you recognize that you're in the midst of a chaotic reaction, say or do as little as
possible until you can restore your level of serenity and peace. Do whatever you need to do (that is not self- or other-destructive) to help yourself relax. Take a few deep breaths. Go for a walk. Clean the kitchen. Go sit in the bathroom. Goto a friend's house. Go to an Al-Anon meeting. Read a meditation book. Take a trip to Florida. Watch a televisionprogram. Find a way to emotionally, mentally, and (if necessary) physically separate yourself from whatever you arereacting to. Find a way to ease your anxiety. Don't take a drink or drive the car down a side street at 85 miles per hour.Do something safe that will help restore your balance.
3. Examine what happened. If it's a minor incident, you may be able to sort through it yourself. If the problem is serious,
or is seriously upsetting you, you may want to discuss it with a friend to help clear your thoughts and emotions. Troublesand feelings go wild when we try to keep them caged inside. Talk about your feelings. Take responsibility for them. Feelwhatever feeling you have. Nobody made you feel. Someone might have helped you feel a particular way, but you didyour feeling all by yourself. Deal with it. Then, tell yourself the truth about what happened. 1 Was someone trying tosock it to you? (If in doubt about whether to interpret something as an insult or rejection, I prefer to believe it hadnothing to do with me. It saves my time and helps me feel good about myself.) Were you trying to control someone orsome event? How serious
 
page_73
Page 74
is the problem or issue? Are you taking responsibility for someone else? Are you angry because someone didn't guess
what you really wanted or what you were really trying to say? Are you taking someone's behavior too personally? Didsomeone push your insecurity or guilt buttons? Is it truly the end of the world, or is it merely sad and disappointing?
4. Figure out what you need to do to take care of yourself. Make your decisions based on reality, and make them from a
peaceful state. Do you need to apologize? Do you want to let it go? Do you need to have a heart-to-heart talk withsomeone? Do you need to make some other decision to take care of yourself? When you make your decision keep inmind what your responsibilities are. You are not responsible for making other people ''see the light," and you do not needto "set them straight." You are responsible for helping yourself see the light and for setting yourself straight. If you can'tget peaceful about a decision, let it go. It's not time to make it yet. Wait until your mind is consistent and your emotionsare calm.
Slow down. You don't have to feel so frightened. You don't have to feel so frantic. Keep things in perspective. Make life
easier for you.
Activity
1. Are you spending too much time reacting to someone or something in your environment? Who or what? How are you
reacting? Is that how you would choose to behave or feel if you had a choice?
2. Go through the previous steps on detachment for whatever or whoever is bothering you the most. If you need to talk to
someone select a trusted friend. If necessary seek professional help.
3. What activities help you feel peaceful and comfortable? (A Twelve Step meeting, a steaming hot shower, a good
movie, and dancing are my favorite ones.)
 
page_74
Page 75
7Set Yourself Free
Let Go and Let God.Twelve Step program slogan
People say codependents are controllers.We nag; lecture; scream; holler; cry; beg; bribe; coerce; hover over; protect; accuse; chase after; run away from; try to
talk into; try to talk out of; attempt to induce guilt in; seduce; entrap; check on; demonstrate how much we've been hurt;hurt people in return so they'll know how it feels; threaten to hurt ourselves; whip power plays on; deliver ultimatums to;do things for; refuse to do things for; stomp out on; get even with; whine; vent fury on; act helpless; suffer in loudsilence; try to please; lie; do sneaky little things; do sneaky big things; clutch at our hearts and threaten to die; grab ourheads and threaten to go crazy; beat on our chests and threaten to kill; enlist the aid of supporters; gauge our wordscarefully; sleep with; refuse to sleep with; have children with; bargain with; drag to counseling; drag out of counseling;talk mean about; talk mean to; insult; condemn; pray for miracles; pay for miracles; go to places we don't want to go; staynearby; supervise; dictate; command; complain; write letters about; write letters to; stay home and wait for; go out andlook for; call all over looking for; drive down dark alleys at night hoping to see; chase down dark alleys at night hopingto catch; run down alleys at night to get away from; bring home; keep home; lock out; move away from; move with;scold; impress upon; advise; teach lessons to; set straight; insist; give in to; placate; provoke; try to make jealous; try to
 
page_75
Page 76
make afraid; remind; inquire; hint; look through pockets; peek in wallets; search dresser drawers; dig through glove
boxes; look in the toilet tank; try to look into the future; search through the past; call relatives about; reason with; settleissues once and for all; settle them again; punish; reward; almost give up on; then try even harder; and a list of otherhandy maneuvers I've either forgotten or haven't tried yet.
We aren't the people who "make things happen." Codependents are the people who consistently, and with a great deal of
effort and energy, try to force things to happen.
We control in the name of love.We do it because we're "only trying to help."We do it because we know best how things should go and how people should behave.We do it because we're right and they're wrong.We control because we're afraid not to do it.We do it because we don't know what else to do.We do it to stop the pain.We control because we think we have to.
We control because we don't think.
We control because controlling is all we can think about.Ultimately we may control because that's the way we've always done things.Tyrannical and dominating, some rule with an iron hand from a self-appointed throne. They are powerful. They know
best. And by God, it will be done this way. They will see to it.
Others do their dirty work undercover. They hide behind a costume of sweetness and niceties, and secretly go about their
businessOTHER PEOPLE'S BUSINESS.
Others, sighing and crying, claim inability, proclaim their dependence, announce their overall victimization, and
successfully control through weakness. They are so helpless. They need your cooperation so badly. They can't livewithout it. Sometimes the weak are the most powerful manipulators and controllers. 1 They have learned to tug at theguilt and pity strings of the world.
 
page_76
Page 77
Many codependents combine tactics, using a variety of methods. Whatever works! (Or, more accurately, whatever
doesn't work although we continue to hope it will.)
Despite tactics, the goals remain the same. Make other people do what you want them to. Make them behave as you think
they should. Don't let them behave in ways you think they shouldn't, but probably would, without your "assistance." Forcelife's events to unravel and unfold in the manner and at such times as you have designated. Do not let what's happening,or what might happen, occur. Hold on tightly and don't let go. We have written the play, and we will see to it that theactors behave and the scenes unfold exactly as we have decided they should. Never mind that we continue to buckreality. If we charge ahead insistently enough, we can (we believe) stop the flow of life, transform people, and changethings to our liking.
We are fooling ourselves.Let me tell you about Maria. She married a man who turned out to be an alcoholic. He was a binge drinker. He didn't
drink every day, every weekend, or every month, but when he didlook out. He stayed drunk for days, sometimes weeks.He started drinking at eight in the morning and drank until he passed out. He vomited all over, devastated the family'sfinances, got fired from jobs, and created unbearable chaos each time he drank. Between binges life was not perfecteither. A sense of impending doom and unresolved feelings filled the air. Other unresolved problems, residues from thedrinking, cluttered their lives. They could never get ahead of the disasters. They were always starting over with a dirtyslate. But, it was better for Maria and her three childrenwhen her husband wasn't drinking. There was hope, too, that thistime it would be different.
It never was different. For years, each time Maria turned around or turned her back, her husband went on a binge. When
she went away for a weekend, when she went to the hospital to deliver her babies, when her husband left town on a trip,or when he was out of her sight for any reasonhe drank.
Whenever Maria returned or retrieved him from wherever he was drinking, he would abruptly quit drinking. Maria
decided that the key
 
page_77
Page 78
to her husband's sobriety was her presence. She could control the drinking (and all the pain it caused) by sticking close to
home and standing guard over her husband. Because she learned this method of control, and because of increasingfeelings of shame, embarrassment, anxiety, and the overall trauma that accompanies codependency, Maria became arecluse. She turned down opportunities to travel, and she refused to attend church conferences she was interested in.Even leaving the house for more than a trip to the grocery store began to threaten the balance she had createdor thought
she had created. In spite of her determined and desperate efforts, her husband still found opportunities to drink. He found
ways to drink at home without her knowing about it, and he drank when she had no choice but to spend the night away
from home.
After one particularly disruptive drinking bout, Maria's husband informed her that the impossible financial predicament
they were in caused him to drink. (He neglected to mention that his drinking had caused the impossible financialpredicament.) He said if she would take a job and help out financially, he would not feel like he had to drink any more.The pressure would be off. Maria thought about his request, then reluctantly agreed. She was afraid to leave home andfelt concerned about setting up appropriate baby-sitting arrangements for the children. She did not feel emotionally ormentally able to work. She especially resented taking a job to earn extra money when her husband was so irresponsiblewith money. But it was worth a try. Anything to keep this man sober!
Before long Maria located a job as a legal secretary. She did wellbetter than she thought she would. Codependents make
great employees. They don't complain; they do more than their share; they do whatever is asked of them; they pleasepeople; and they try to do their work perfectlyat least for a while, until they become angry and resentful.
Maria started feeling a little better about herself. She enjoyed her contact with peoplesomething that had been missing in
her life. She liked the feeling of earning her own money (although she still resented her husband's irresponsibility withit). And her employers appreciated her. They gave her increasing amounts of responsibility and were on the verge ofpromoting her to a paralegal position. But about that time Maria
 
page_78
Page 79
began to feel that old familiar anxious feelingher cue that her husband was about to drink again.
The feeling came and went for days. Then one day, it hit hard. That handwringing, gut-twisting anxiety came back in full
force. Maria started calling her husband on the phone. He was not at work where he was supposed to be. His employerdidn't know where he was. She made more phone calls. Nobody knew where he was. She spent the day biting her nails,making frantic phone calls, and hoping her fellow employees wouldn't see through her" everything's fineno problem"veneer. When she arrived home that evening she discovered that her husband was not at home and had not picked up thechildren from day care as he was supposed to. Things were out of control again. He was drinking again. The nextmorning she quit her jobwalked out with no appropriate notice. By 10:00 A.M., she was back in her houseguarding herhusband.
Years later she said, "I felt like I had to do this. I had to get things under controlMY CONTROL."My question is this: Who's controlling whom?Maria learned she was not controlling her husband or his drinking at all. He and his alcoholism were controlling her.This point was further clarified for me one evening during a family group facilitation I had at a treatment center. (Many
of my clients are wisewiser than I am. I have learned much by listening to them.) During the group, the wife of analcoholic talked openly to her husbanda man who had spent many years of their marriage drinking, unemployed, and inprison.
"You accuse me of trying to control you, and I guess I have," she said. "I've gone to bars with you so you wouldn't drink
so much. I've let you come home when you were abusive and drunk so you wouldn't drink anymore or hurt yourself. I'vemeasured your drinks, drank with you (and I hate drinking), hid your bottles, and taken you to Alcoholics Anonymousmeetings.
"But the truth is," she said, "you've been controlling me. All those letters from prison telling me what I've wanted to
hear. All those prom-
 
page_79
Page 80
ises, all those words. And every time I'm ready to leave youto walk out for goodyou do or say just the right thing to keep
me from leaving. You know just what I want to hear, and that's what you tell me. But you never change. You've never
intended to change. You just want to control me."
He smiled a half-smile and nodded when she said that. "Yes," he said, "I have been trying to control you. And I've been
doing a pretty good job of it at that."
When we attempt to control people and things that we have no business controlling, we are controlled. We forfeit our
power to think, feel, and act in accordance with our best interests. We frequently lose control of ourselves. Often, we arebeing controlled not just by people but by diseases such as alcoholism, eating disorders, and compulsive gambling.Alcoholism and other destructive disorders are powerful forces. Never forget that alcoholics and other troubled personsare expert controllers. We have met our match when we attempt to control them or their disease. We lose the battles. Welose the wars. We lose our selvesour lives. Borrowing a tidbit from Al-Anon: You didn't cause it; you can't control it;and you can't cure it.
So stop trying! We become utterly frustrated when we try to do the impossible. And we usually prevent the possible from
happening. I believe that clutching tightly to a person or thing, or forcing my will on any given situation eliminates thepossibility of my Higher Power doing anything constructive about that situation, the person, or me. My controlling blocksGod's power. It blocks other people's ability to grow. It stops events from happening naturally. It prevents me fromenjoying people or events.
Control is an illusion. It doesn't work. We cannot control alcoholism. We cannot control anyone's compulsive
behaviorsovereating, sexual, gamblingor any of their behaviors. We cannot (and have no business trying to) controlanyone's emotions, mind, or choices. We cannot control the outcome of events. We cannot control life. Some of us canbarely control ourselves.
People ultimately do what they want to do. They feel how they want to feel (or how they are feeling); they think what
they want to think; they
 
page_80
Page 81
do the things they believe they need to do; and they will change only when they are ready to change. It doesn't matter if
they're wrong and we're right. It doesn't matter if they're hurting themselves. It doesn't matter that we could help them ifthey'd only listen to, and cooperate with, us. IT DOESN'T MATTER, DOESN'T MATTER, DOESN'T MATTER,DOESN'T MATTER.
We cannot change people. Any attempts to control them are a delusion as well as an illusion. People will either resist our
efforts or redouble their efforts to prove we can't control them. They may temporarily adapt to our demands, but themoment we turn our backs they will return to their natural state. Furthermore, people will punish us for making them dosomething they don't want to do, or be something they don't want to be. No amount of control will effect a permanent ordesirable change in another person. We can sometimes do things that increase the probability that people will want tochange, but we can't even guarantee or control that.
And that's the truth. It's too bad. It's sometimes hard to accept, especially if someone you love is hurting him- or herself
and you. But that's the way it is. The only person you can now or ever change is yourself. The only person that it is yourbusiness to control is yourself.
Detach. Surrender. Sometimes when we do that the result we have been waiting and hoping for happens quickly, almost
miraculously. Sometimes it doesn't. Sometimes it never happens. But you will benefit. You don't have to stop caring orloving. You don't have to tolerate abuse. You don't have to abandon constructive, problem-solving methods such asprofessional intervention. You only need to put your emotional, mental, spiritual, and physical hands back in your ownpockets and leave things and people alone. Let them be. Make any decisions you need to make to take care of yourself,but don't make them to control other people. Start taking care of yourself!
''But this is so important to me," many people protest. "I can't detach."If it's that important to you, I suggest that is all the more reason to detach.
 
page_81
Page 82
I heard some wisdom on detachment out of the mouths of babesmy babies. Sometimes, my youngest son, Shane, hangs
on too tightly and too long after a hug. He starts tipping me over. I lose my balance, and become impatient for him tostop hugging me. I begin to resist him. Perhaps he does it to keep me close to him a little longer. Maybe it's a form ofcontrol over me. I don't know. One night when he did this my daughter watched until even she became frustrated andimpatient.
"Shane," she said, "there comes a time to let go."For each of us, there comes a time to let go. You will know when that time has come. When you have done all that you
can do, it is time to detach. Deal with your feelings. Face your fears about losing control. Gain control of yourself andyour responsibilities. Free others to be who they are. In so doing, you will set yourself free.
Activity
1. Is there an event or person in your life that you are trying to control? Why? Write a few paragraphs about it.
2. In what ways (mentally, physically, emotionally, etc.) are you being controlled by whatever or whomever you are
attempting to control?
3. What would happen (to you and the other person) if you detached from this situation or person? Will that probably
happen anyway, in spite of your controlling gestures? How are you benefitting by attempting to control the situation?How is the other person benefitting by your attempts to control? How effective are your attempts at controlling theoutcomes of events?
 
page_82
Page 83
8Remove the Victim
We're so careful to see that no one gets hurt. No one, that is, but ourselves. Al-Anon member
About a year into my recovery from codependency, I realized I was still doing something over and over that caused me
pain. I sensed this pattern had something to do with why many of my relationships went sour. But I didn't know what "it"was that I was doing, so I couldn't stop doing it.
One sunny day, as I was walking down the sidewalk with my friend Scott, I stopped, turned to him, and asked, "What is
the one thing codependents do over and over? What is it that keeps us feeling so bad?"
He thought about my question for a moment before answering. "Codependents are caretakersrescuers. They rescue, then
they persecute, then they end up victimized. Study the Karpman Drama Triangle," he said. The Karpman Drama Triangleand the accompanying roles of rescuer, persecutor, and victim, are the work and observation of Stephen B. Karpman. 1
What he said didn't make sense, but I went home, dragged out some therapy books that were collecting dust on my
shelves, and studied. 2 After a while, a light went on inside my head. I saw. I understood. And I felt like I had discovered
fire.
This was it. This was my pattern. This is our pattern. This is what we repeatedly do with friends, family, acquaintances,
clients, or anybody
 
page_83
Page 84
around us. As codependents, we may do many things, but this pattern is what we do best and most often. This is our
favorite reaction.
We are the rescuers, the enablers. We are the great godmothers or godfathers to the entire world, as Earnie Larsen says.
We not only meet people's needs, we anticipate them. We fix, nurture, and fuss over others. We make better, solve, andattend to. And we do it all so well. ''Your wish is my command," is our theme. "Your problem is my problem," is ourmotto. We are the caretakers.
What's a Rescue?
Rescuing and caretaking  mean almost what they sound like. We rescue people from their responsibilities. We take care
of people's responsibilities for them. Later we get mad at them for what we've done. Then we feel used and sorry for
ourselves. That is the pattern, the triangle.
Rescuing and caretaking are synonymous. Their definitions are closely connected to enabling. Enabling is therapeutic
jargon that means a destructive form of helping. Any acts that help an alcoholic continue drinking, prevent the alcoholicfrom suffering consequences, or in any way make it easier for an alcoholic to continue drinking are considered enablingbehaviors.
As counselor Scott Egleston says, we rescue anytime we take responsibility for another human beingfor that person's
thoughts, feelings, decisions, behaviors, growth, well-being, problems, or destiny. The following acts constitute arescuing or caretaking move:
· Doing something we really don't want to do.
· Saying yes when we mean no.
· Doing something for someone although that person is capable of and should be doing it for him- or herself.
· Meeting people's needs without being asked and before we've agreed to do so.
· Doing more than a fair share of work after our help is requested.
· Consistently giving more than we receive in a particular situation.
· Fixing people's feelings.
 
page_84
Page 85
· Doing people's thinking for them.
· Speaking for another person.
· Suffering people's consequences for them.
· Solving people's problems for them.
· Putting more interest and activity into a joint effort than the other person does.
· Not asking for what we want, need, and desire.
We rescue whenever we take care of other people.
At the time we rescue or caretake we may feel one or more of the following feelings: discomfort and awkwardness about
the other person's dilemma; urgency to do something; pity; guilt; saintliness; anxiety; extreme responsibility for thatperson or problem; fear; a sense of being forced or compelled to do something; mild or severe reluctance to do anything;more competency than the person we are "helping"; or occasional resentment at being put in this position. We also think
the person we are taking care of is helpless and unable to do what we are doing for him or her. We feel needed
temporarily.
I am not referring to acts of love, kindness, compassion, and true helpingsituations where our assistance is legitimately
wanted and needed and we want to give that assistance. These acts are the good stuff of life. Rescuing or caretaking isn't.
Caretaking looks like a much friendlier act than it is. It requires incompetency on the part of the person being taken care
of. We rescue "victims"people who we believe are not capable of being responsible for themselves. The victims actuallyare capable of taking care of themselves, even though we and they don't admit it. Usually, our victims are just hangingaround that corner of the triangle, waiting for us to make our move and jump on the triangle with them.
After we rescue, we will inevitably move to the next corner of the triangle: persecution. We become resentful and angry
at the person we have so generously "helped." We've done something we didn't want to do, we've done something thatwas not our responsibility to do, we've ignored our own needs and wants, and we get angry about it. To compli-
 
page_85
Page 86
cate matters, this victim, this poor person we've rescued, is not grateful for our help. He or she is not appreciative enough
of the sacrifice we have made. The victim isn't behaving the way he or she should. This person is not even taking ouradvice, which we offered so readily. This person is not letting us fix that feeling. Something doesn't work right or feelright, so we rip off our halos and pull out our pitchforks.
Sometimes, people don't notice or choose not to notice our peeved mood. Sometimes we do our best to hide it.
Sometimes we let loose with the full force of our fury; we particularly do this with family members. Something aboutfamily tends to bring out the real us. Whether we show, hide, or partially hide our agitation and resentment, WE KNOWwhat's going on.
Most of the time, the people we rescue immediately sense our shift in mood. They saw it coming. It's just the excuse they
needed to turn on us. It's their  turn in the persecution corner. This may precede, happen at the same time as, or follow our
feelings of anger. Sometimes, the victims respond to our anger. Usually it is a response to our taking responsibility forthat person, which directly or indirectly tells him or her how incapable we believe he or she is. People resent being toldor shown they are incompetent, no matter how loudly they plead incompetency. And they resent us for adding insult toinjury by becoming angry with them after we point out their incompetency.
Then it's time for our final move. We head right for our favorite spot: the victim corner on the bottom. This is the
predictable and unavoidable result of a rescue. Feelings of helplessness, hurt, sorrow, shame, and self-pity abound. Wehave been usedagain. We have gone unappreciatedagain. We try so hard to help people, to be good to them. We moan,"Why? Why does this ALWAYS happen to me?" Another person has trampled on us, socked it to us. We wonder, shallwe forever be victims? Probably, if we don't stop rescuing and caretaking.
Many codependents, at some time in their lives, were true victimsof someone's abuse, neglect, abandonment, alcoholism,
or any number of situations that can victimize people. We were, at some time, truly helpless to protect ourselves or solveour problems. Something came our way,
 
page_86
Page 87
something we didn't ask for, and it hurt us terribly. That is sad, truly sad. But an even sadder fact is that many of us
codependents began to see ourselves as victims. Our painful history repeats itself. As caretakers, we allow people tovictimize us, and we participate in our victimization by perpetually rescuing people. Rescuing or caretaking is not an actof love. The Drama Triangle is a hate triangle. It fosters and maintains self-hate, and it hinders our feelings for otherpeople.
The triangle and the shifting roles of rescuer, persecutor, and victim are a visible process we go through. The role
changes and the emotional changes come over us as certainly and as intensely as if we were reading a script. We cancomplete the process in seconds, experiencing only mild emotions as we shift roles. Or, we can take years to completethe triangle and really work up to a major explosion. We can, and many of us do, rescue twenty times in one day.
Let me illustrate a rescue. A friend of mine was married to an alcoholic. Whenever he got drunk, she would drive all over
town, enlist the aid of friends, and relentlessly pursue her husband until she found him. She usually felt benevolent,
concerned, and sorry for hima warning that a rescue was about to take placeuntil she got him home and tucked intobedtaking responsibility for him and his sobriety. When his head hit the pillow, things changed. She charged into thepersecutor position. She didn't want this man in her home. She expected him to whine for days about how sick he was.He was unable to assume his responsibilities in the family, and he generally acted pitiful. He had done this so manytimes! So, she would start in on him, beginning with little snipes and working up to a full-blown blast. He would brieflytolerate her persecution before switching from a helpless victim to vengeful persecutor. She then took a downward dipinto the victim role. Self-pity, feelings of helplessness, shame, and despair set in. This was the story of her life, she wouldmoan. After all she had done for him, how could he treat her this way? Why did this always happen to her? She felt likea victim of circumstance, a victim of her husband's outrageous behavior, a victim of life. It never occurred to her that shewas also a victim of herself and her own behavior.
 
page_87
Page 88
Here's another illustration of a rescue. One summer, a friend wanted me to take her to an apple farm. Originally, I
wanted to go, and we set a date. By the time that date came, however, I was extremely busy. I called her, and instead oftelling her I didn't want to go, I asked to postpone it. I felt guilty and responsible for her feelingsanother rescue on theway. I couldn't disappoint her because I thought she couldn't handle or be responsible for her feelings. I couldn't tell thetruth, because I thought she might be angry with memore emotional responsibilityas if someone else's anger is mybusiness. The next weekend rolled around, and I squeezed the trip into my even busier schedule. But I did not want togo. I didn't even need any apples; I had two drawers in my refrigerator crammed with apples. Before I stopped my car infront of her house, I had already switched into the persecuting role. I seethed with resentful, tense thoughts as we droveto the apple orchard. When we arrived at the orchard and began tasting and looking at apples, it became apparent neitherof us was enjoying herself. After a few minutes, my friend turned to me. "I really don't want any apples," she said. "Ibought some last week. I only came because I thought you wanted to, and I didn't want to hurt your feelings."
This example is only one of the thousands of rescues I have devoted my life to performing. When I began to understand
this process, I realized that I spent most of my waking moments flipping around the jagged edges of this triangle takingresponsibility for anybody and everybody besides myself. Sometimes I managed big rescues; sometimes I managed littlerescues. My friendships were initiated, maintained, and ultimately discontinued according to the rescue progression.Rescuing infiltrated my relationships with family members and clients. It kept me in a tizzy most of the time.
Two codependents in a relationship can really play havoc with each other. Consider two people-pleasers in a relationship
with each other. Now consider two people-pleasers in a relationship with each other when they both want out of therelationship. They will, as Earnie Larsen says, do horrible things. They'll nearly destroy each other and themselves beforeone will stop rescuing and say, "I want out."
 
page_88
Page 89
As codependents, we spend much of our time rescuing. We try to be living proof that people can outgive God. I can
usually spot a codependent within the first five minutes of meeting and talking. He or she will either offer meunrequested help, or the person will keep talking to me although he or she is obviously uncomfortable and wants todiscontinue the conversation. The person begins the relationship by taking responsibility for me and not takingresponsibility for him- or herself.
Some of us become so tired from the enormous burdentotal responsibility for all human beingsthat we may skip the
feelings of pity and concern that accompany the rescue act and move ahead to anger. We're angry all the time; we feelanger and resentment toward potential victims. A person with a need or problem provokes us to feel we have to dosomething or feel guilty. After a rescue, we make no bones about our hostility toward this uncomfortable predicament. Ihave frequently seen this happen to people in helping professions. After so many years of rescuinggiving so much andreceiving far less in returnmany professional helpers adopt a hostile attitude toward their clients. They may continue tohang in there and keep "helping" them, anyway, but they will usually leave their profession feeling terribly victimized,according to some counselors.
Caretaking doesn't help; it causes problems. When we take care of people and do things we don't want to do, we ignore
personal needs, wants, and feelings. We put ourselves aside. Sometimes, we get so busy taking care of people that we putour entire lives on hold. Many caretakers are harried and overcommitted; they enjoy none of their activities. Caretakerslook so responsible, but we aren't. We don't assume responsibility for our highest responsibilityourselves.
We consistently give more than we receive, then feel abused and neglected because of it. We wonder why, when we
anticipate the needs of others, no one notices our  needs. We may become seriously depressed as a result of not getting
our needs met. Yet, a good caretaker feels safest when giving; we feel guilty and uncomfortable when someone gives tous or when we do something to meet our needs. Sometimes, codependents may become so locked into a caretaker rolethat we feel dismayed and
 
page_89
Page 90
rejected when we can't caretake or rescue someonewhen someone refuses to be "helped."
The worst aspect of caretaking is we become and stay victims. I believe many serious self-destructive behaviorschemical
abuse, eating disorders, sexual disordersare developed through this victim role. As victims, we attract perpetrators. Webelieve we need someone to take care of us, because we feel helpless. Some caretakers will ultimately present ourselvesto somebody or some institution, needing to be taken care of mentally, physically, financially, or emotionally.
Why, you might ask, would apparently rational people do this rescuing? Many reasons. Most of us aren't even aware of
what we're doing. Most of us truly believe we're helping. Some of us believe we have to rescue. We have confused ideasabout what constitutes help and what doesn't. Many of us are convinced that rescuing is a charitable deed. We may eventhink it cruel and heartless to do something as cold-blooded as allowing a person to work through or face a legitimatefeeling, suffer a consequence, be disappointed by hearing "no," be asked to respond to our needs and wants, andgenerally be held responsible and accountable for him- or herself in this world. Never mind that they will certainly pay aprice for our "helping"a price that will be as harsh as or more severe than any feeling they may be facing.
Many of us do not understand what we are responsible for and what we are not responsible for. We may believe we have
to get into a tizzy when someone has a problem because it is our responsibility to do that. Sometimes, we become sick offeeling responsible for so much that we reject all responsibility and become totally irresponsible.
However, at the heart of most rescues is a demon: low self-worth. We rescue because we don't feel good about ourselves.
Although the feelings are transient and artificial, caretaking provides us with a temporary hit of good feelings, self-worth, and power. Just as a drink helps an alcoholic momentarily feel better, a rescue move momentarily distracts usfrom the pain of being who we are. We don't feel lovable, so we settle for being needed. We don't feel good aboutourselves, so we feel compelled to do a particular thing to prove how good we are.
 
page_90
Page 91
We rescue because we don't feel good about other people either. Sometimes with justification, sometimes without, we
decide other people simply cannot be held responsible for themselves. Although this may appear to be true, it simply isnot a fact. Unless a person has brain damage, a serious physical impairment, or is an infant, that person can beresponsible for him- or herself.
Sometimes we rescue because it's easier than dealing with the discomfort and awkwardness of facing other people's
unsolved problems. We haven't learned to say, ''It's too bad you're having that problem. What do you need from me?"We've learned to say, "Here. Let me do that for you."
Some of us learned to be caretakers when we were children. Perhaps we were almost forced to as a result of living with
an alcoholic parent or some other family problem. Some of us may have started caretaking later in life, as a result ofbeing in a committed relationship with an alcoholic or other person who refused and appeared unable to take care of himor herself. We decided to copeto survivethe best way we could, by picking up the slack and assuming other people'sresponsibilities.
Many codependents have been taught other ways to be caretakers. Maybe someone taught us these lies, and we believed
them: don't be selfish, always be kind and help people, never hurt other people's feelings because we "make them feel,"
never say no, and don't mention personal wants and needs because it's not polite.
We may have been taught to be responsible for other people but not responsible for ourselves. Some women were taught
that good, desirable wives and mothers were caretakers. Caretaking was expected and required of them. It was their duty.Some men believe good husbands and fathers are caretakerssuperheroes responsible for meeting every need of eachfamily member.
Sometimes a state resembling codependency sets in when a person is taking care of infants or young children. Taking
care of infants requires a person to forfeit his or her needs, to do things he or she doesn't want to do, to squelch his or herfeelings and desires (4 A.M. feedings usually only meet the needs of the person being fed), and to assume total respon-
 
page_91
Page 92
sibility for another human being. Taking care of children is not rescuing. That is an actual responsibility and is not the
kind of caretaking I'm talking about. But if that person doesn't take care of him- or herself, he or she may begin to feelthe codependent blues.
Others may have interpreted religious beliefs as a mandate to caretake. Be cheerful givers, we are told. Go the extra mile.
Love our neighbors, and we try. We try so hard. We try too hard. And then we wonder what's wrong with us because ourChristian beliefs aren't working. Our lives aren't working either.
Christian beliefs work just fine. Your life can work just fine. It's rescuing that doesn't work. "It's like trying to catch
butterflies with a broomstick," observed a friend. Rescuing leaves us bewildered and befuddled every time. It's a self-destructive reaction, another way codependents attach themselves to people and become detached from themselves. It'sanother way we attempt to control, but instead become controlled by people. Caretaking is an unhealthy parent-childrelationshipsometimes between two consenting adults, sometimes between an adult and a child.
Caretaking breeds anger. Caretakers become angry parents, angry friends, angry lovers. We may become unsatisfied,
frustrated, and confused Christians. The people we help either are or they become helpless, angry victims. Caretakersbecome victims.
Most of us have heard the Biblical parable about Mary and Martha. While Mary sat and talked with Jesus and His
friends, Martha cleaned and cooked. Before long, the story goes, Martha started banging pans, accusing Mary of beinglazy. Martha complained that she had to do everything while Mary relaxed and enjoyed herself. Does this soundfamiliar? Jesus didn't let this one go by. He told Martha to hush. Mary knows what's important, He said. Mary made theright decision.
His message might be that Mary made the right choice because it's more important to enjoy people than it is to cook and
clean. But I also believe there's a message here about taking responsibility for our choices, doing what we want to bedoing, and realizing how we become angry
 
page_92
Page 93
when we don't. Maybe Mary's choice was right because she acted as she wanted to. Jesus helped many people, but He
was honest and straightforward about it. He didn't persecute people after He helped them. And He asked them what theywanted from Him. Sometimes He asked why, too. He held people responsible for their behavior.
I think caretaking perverts Biblical messages about giving, loving, and helping. Nowhere in the Bible are we instructed to
do something for someone, then scratch his or her eyes out. Nowhere are we told to walk the extra mile with someone,and then grab the person's cane and beat him or her with it. Caring about people and giving are good, desirablequalitiessomething we need to dobut many codependents have misinterpreted the suggestions to "give until it hurts." Wecontinue giving long after it hurts, usually until we are doubled over in pain. It's good to give some away, but we don'thave to give it all away. It's okay to keep some for ourselves.
I believe God wants us to help people and share our time, talents, and money. But I also believe He wants us to give
from a position of high self-esteem. I believe acts of kindness are not kind unless we feel good about ourselves, what we
are doing, and the person we are doing it for. I think God is in each of us and speaks to each of us. If we absolutely can'tfeel good about something we're doing, then we shouldn't do itno matter how charitable it seems. We also shouldn't dothings for others that they ought to and are capable of doing for themselves. Other people aren't helpless. Neither are we.
"God told us to lose our lives. He told us to give to people," says the Reverend Daniel Johns, Senior Pastor at Trinity
Lutheran Church in Stillwater, Minnesota. "But I don't think He ever intended people to use the Scriptures to behave inunhealthy ways."
Giving to and doing things for and with people are essential parts of healthy living and healthy relationships. But
learning when not to give, when not to give in, and when not to do things for and with people are also essential parts ofhealthy living and healthy relationships. It is not good to take care of people who take advantage of us to avoid responsi-
 
page_93
Page 94
bility. It hurts them, and it hurts us. There is a thin line between helping and hurting people, between beneficial giving
and destructive giving. We can learn to make that distinction.
Caretaking is an act and an attitude. For some of us, it becomes a role, an approach to our entire lives and to all the
people around us. Caretaking is, I believe, closely associated with martyrdom (a state codependents are frequentlyaccused of being in), and people-pleasing (another accusation hurled at us). Martyrs, according to Earnie Larsen, ''screwthings up." We need to keep sacrificing our happiness as well as others' for the good of some unknown cause that doesn'tdemand sacrifice. People-pleasers, according to Earnie Larsen, can't be trusted. We lie. And as caretakers, we don't takecare of ourselves.
The most exciting thing about caretaking is learning to understand what it is and when we are doing it, so we can stop
doing it.
We can learn to recognize a rescue. Refuse to rescue. Refuse to let people rescue us.  Take responsibility for ourselves,
and let others do the same. Whether we change our attitudes, our circumstances, our behaviors, or our minds, the kindest
thing we can do is remove the victimsourselves.
Activity
1. This assignment may take some time, but if caretaking is causing your problems, it may be a breakthrough experience
for you. On a sheet of paper, detail all the things you consider your responsibilities. Do this for your participation atwork, with children, with friends, and with your spouse or lover. Now, list detail by detail what responsibilities belong tothe other people in your life. If any responsibilities are shared, list what percentage you think is appropriate for eachperson. For instance, if your spouse is working and you have chosen to be a homemaker and work part-time, list whatpercentage of the financial responsibilities you assume, and what percentage of the household chores he or she assumes.You may be surprised at how much inappropriate responsibility you have taken on and how little you have allowedothers to assume. You may
 
page_94
Page 95
also find you have been so busy with other people's business that you have been neglecting some of your trueresponsibilities.
Become familiar with the Karpman Drama Triangle and how you go through the process in your life. When you findyourself rescuing, watch for the role and mood shifts. When you catch yourself feeling resentful or used, figure outhow you rescued. Practice non-rescuing behaviors: Say no when you want to say no. Do things you want to do. Refuseto guess what people want and need; instead insist that others ask you directly for what they want and need from you.Begin asking directly for what you want and need. Refuse to assume other people's responsibilities. When you initiallystop taking care of people who are used to having you take care of them, they may become angry or frustrated. You've
changed the system, rocked the boat. It means more work for them, and they can't use you anymore. Explain to them
what you are doing, and allow them to be responsible for their feelings. They may thank you for it later. They may
even surprise yousometimes the people we thought least able to take care of themselves can, when we stop taking careof them.
 
page_95
Page 97
9Undependence
"What is it about me?" she asked. "Do I need a dead body laying in my bed in order to feel good about myself?" Alice B., a codependent who has been married to two alcoholics
"I'm real independentas long as I'm in a relationship," announced a policewoman who has been involved with several
emotionally troubled men.
"My husband has been lying on the couch drunk and hasn't brought home a paycheck in ten years," said another woman,
the director of a large human services organization. "Who needs this?" she asked. "I must,'' she said, answering her ownquestion. ''But why? And for what?"
A woman who had recently joined Al-Anon called me one afternoon. This married woman worked part-time as a
registered nurse, had assumed all the responsibility for raising her two children, and did all the household chores,including repairs and finances. "I want to separate from my husband," she sobbed. "I can't stand him or his abuse anylonger. But tell me, please tell me," she asked, "do you think I can take care of myself?"
The words vary, but the thought is the same. "I'm not happy living with this person, but I don't think I can live without
him (or her). I cannot, for some reason, find it within myself to face the aloneness that every human being must face orcontinue to run from: that of being ultimately and solely responsible for taking care of myself. I don't believe I can take
 
page_97
Page 98
care of myself. I'm not sure I want to. I need a person, any person, to buffer the shock of my solitary condition. No
matter what the cost."
Colette Dowling wrote about this thought pattern in The Cinderella Complex. Penelope Russianoff discussed it in Why
Do I Think I'm Nothing Without a Man? I've said it many times.
Whether codependents appear fragile and helpless, or sturdy and powerful, most of us are frightened, needy, vulnerable
children who are aching and desperate to be loved and cared for.
This child in us believes we are unlovable and will never find the comfort we are seeking; sometimes this vulnerable
child becomes too desperate. People have abandoned us, emotionally and physically. People have rejected us. Peoplehave abused us, let us down. People have never been there for us; they have not seen, heard, or responded to our needs.We may come to believe that people will never be there for us. For many of us, even God seems to have gone away.
We have been there for so many people. Most of us desperately want someone to finally be there for us. We need
someone, anyone, to rescue us from the stark loneliness, alienation, and pain. We want some of the good stuff, and thegood stuff is not in us. Pain is in us. We feel so helpless and uncertain. Others look so powerful and assured. Weconclude the magic must be in them.
So we become dependent on them. We can become dependent on lovers, spouses, friends, parents, or our children. We
become dependent on their approval. We become dependent on their presence. We become dependent on their need forus. We become dependent on their love, even though we believe we will never receive their love; we believe we are
unlovable and nobody has ever loved us in a way that met our needs.
I am not saying codependents are peculiar ducks because they want and need love and approval. Most people want to be
in a love relationship. They want a special person in their lives. Most people want and need friends. Most people wantthe people in their lives to love and approve of them. These are natural, healthy desires. A certain amount of emotionaldependency is present in most relationships, including the healthiest ones. 1 But many men and women don't just wantand need
 
page_98
Page 99
peoplewe need people. We may become driven, controlled by this need.
Needing people too much can cause problems. Other people become the key to our happiness. I believe much of the
other-centeredness, orbiting our lives around other people, goes hand in hand with codependency and springs out of ouremotional insecurity. I believe much of this incessant approval seeking we indulge in also comes from insecurity. Themagic is in others, not us, we believe. The good feelings are in them, not us. The less good stuff we find in ourselves, themore we seek it in others. They have it all; we have nothing. Our existence is not important. We have been abandonedand neglected so often that we also abandon ourselves.
Needing people so much, yet believing we are unlovable and people will never be there for us, can become a deeply
ingrained belief. Sometimes, we think people aren't there for us when they really are. Our need may block our vision,preventing us from seeing the love that is there for us.
Sometimes, no human being could be there for us the way we need them to beto absorb us, care for us, and make us feel
good, complete, and safe.
Many of us expect and need other people so much that we settle for too little. We may become dependent on troubled
peoplealcoholics and other people with problems. We can become dependent on people we don't particularly like or love.Sometimes, we need people so badly we settle for nearly anyone. We may need people who don't meet our needs. Again,we may find ourselves in situations where we need someone to be there for us, but the person we have chosen cannot orwill not do that.
We may even convince ourselves that we can't live without someone and will wither and die if that person is not in our
lives. If that person is an alcoholic or deeply troubled, we may tolerate abuse and insanity to keep him or her in our lives,to protect our source of emotional security. Our need becomes so great that we settle for too little. Our expectations dropbelow normal, below what we ought to expect from our relationships. Then, we become trapped, stuck.
 
page_99
Page 100
". . . It is no longer Camelot. It is no longer even person to person," wrote Janet Geringer Woititz in an article from the
book Co-Dependency, An Emerging Issue. "The distortion is bizarre. I will stay because . . . 'He doesn't beat me.' 'Shedoesn't run around.' 'He hasn't lost his job.' Imagine getting credit for the behaviors we ordinary mortals do as a matter ofcourse. Even if the worst is true. Even if he does beat you. Even if she does run around. Even if he is no longer working.Even with all this, you will then say, 'But I love him/her!' When I respond, 'Tell me, what is so lovable?' there is noresponse. The answer doesn't come, but the power of being emotionally stuck is far greater than the power of reason." 2
I am not suggesting all our intimate relationships are based on insecurities and dependencies. Certainly the power of love
overrides common sense, and perhaps that is how it should be at times. By all means, if we love an alcoholic and want tostick with him or her, we should keep loving that person. But the driving force of emotional insecurity can also becomefar greater than the power of reason or love. Not being centered in ourselves and not feeling emotionally secure withourselves may trap us. 3 We may become afraid to terminate relationships that are dead and destructive. We may allow
people to hurt and abuse us, and that is never in our best interest.
People who feel trapped look for escapes. Codependents who feel stuck in a relationship may begin planning an escape.
Sometimes our escape route is a positive, healthy one; we begin taking steps to become undependent, financially andemotionally. "Undependence" is a term Penelope Russianoff uses in her book to describe that desirable balance wherein
we acknowledge and meet our healthy, natural needs for people and love, yet we don't become overly or harmfully
dependent on them.
We may go back to school, get a job, or set other goals that will bring freedom. And we usually begin setting those goals
when we are sick enough of being trapped. Some codependents, however, plan destructive escapes. We may try to escapeour prison by using alcohol or drugs. We may become workaholics. We may seek escape by becoming emotionallydependent on another person who is like the person we were attempting
 
page_100
Page 101
to escapeanother alcoholic, for example. Many codependents begin to contemplate suicide. For some, ending our lives
appears to be the only way out of this terribly painful situation.
Emotional dependency and feeling stuck can also cause problems in salvageable relationships. If we are in a relationship
that is still good, we may be too insecure to detach and start taking care of ourselves. We may stifle ourselves andsmother or drive away the other person. That much need becomes obvious to other people. It can be sensed, felt.
Ultimately, too much dependency on a person can kill love. Relationships based on emotional insecurity and need, rather
than on love, can become self-destructive. They don't work. Too much need drives people away and smothers love. Itscares people away. It attracts the wrong kind of people. And our real needs don't get met. Our real needs become greaterand so does our despair. We center our lives around this person, trying to protect our source of security and happiness.We forfeit our lives to do this. And we become angry at this person. We are being controlled by him or her. We aredependent on that person. We ultimately become angry and resentful at what we are dependent on and controlled by,because we have given our personal power and rights to that person. 4
Feeling desperate or dependent can expose us to other risks too. If we let the desperate part of us make our choices, we
may unwittingly put ourselves in situations where we expose ourselves to sexually transmitted diseases such as herpes orAIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome). It is not safe to be that needy in intimate relationships.
Sometimes, we may play tricks on ourselves to disguise our dependency. Some of these tricks, according to Colette
Dowling, are making someone more than he or she is ("He's such a genius; that's why I stick with him."), makingsomeone less than he or she is ("Men are such babies; they can't take care of themselves."), andthe favorite trick ofcodependentscaretaking. Dowling demonstrated these characteristics in The Cinderella Complex, where she cited the casehistory of Madeleine, a woman who was extricating herself from a destructive relationship with Manny, her alcoholichusband.
 
page_101
Page 102
That is the last trick of the dependent personalitybelieving that you're responsible for "taking care of" the other one.
Madeleine had always felt more responsible for Manny's survival than for her own. As long as she was concentrating onMannyhis passivity, his indecisiveness, his problems with alcoholshe focused all her energy on devising solutions forhim, or for "them," and never had to look inside herself. It was why it had taken twenty-two years for Madeleine to catchon to the fact that if things continued as they had always been, she would end up shortchanged. She would end up neverhaving lived a life.
. . . From the time she was eighteen until she was fortyyears when people are supposed to reap, and grow, and experience
the worldMadeleine Boroff had been hanging on, pretending to herself that life was not what it was, that her husbandwould get his bearings before long, and that she would one day spring free to live her own inner lifepeacefully,creatively.
For twenty-two years she had not been able to cope with what it would mean to face down the lie, and so, without
intending any harm, but too frightened to live authentically, she turned her back on truth.
It may seem dramatic in its surface details, but in its fundamental dynamic Madeleine's story is not so unusual. The go-
along quality she exhibited, the seeming inability to extricate herself, or even think of extricating herself, from an utterly
draining relationshipthese signs of helplessness are characteristic of women who are psychologically dependent. 5
Why do we do this to ourselves? Why do we feel so uncertain and vulnerable that we can't go about the business of
living our lives? Why, when we have proved we are so strong and capable by the sheer fact that many of us haveendured and survived what we have, can't we believe in ourselves? Why, when we are experts at taking care ofeverybody around us, do we doubt our ability to take care of ourselves? What is it about us?
 
page_102
Page 103
Many of us learned these things because when we were children, someone very important to us was unable to give us the
love, approval, and emotional security we needed. So we've gone about our lives the best way we could, still lookingvaguely or desperately for something we never got. Some of us are still beating our heads against the cement trying toget this love from people who, like Mother or Father, are unable to give what we need. The cycle repeats itself until it isinterrupted and stopped. It's called unfinished business.
Maybe we've been taught to not trust ourselves. This happens when we have a feeling and we're told it's wrong or
inappropriate. Or when we confront a lie or an inconsistency and we're told we're crazy. We lose faith in that deep,important part of ourselves that feels appropriate feelings, senses truth, and has confidence in its ability to handle life'ssituations. Pretty soon, we may believe what we are told about ourselvesthat we're off, a tad crazy, not to be trusted. Welook at the people around us  sometimes sick, troubled, out of control peopleand we think, "They're okay. They must be.
They told me so. So it must be me. There must be something fundamentally wrong with me." We abandon ourselves andlose faith in our ability to take care of ourselves.
Some women were taught to be dependent. They learned to center their lives around other people and to be taken care of.
Even since the women's liberation movement, many women, deep inside, fear being alone. 6 Many people, not justwomen, fear being alone and taking care of themselves. It is part of being human.
Some of us may have entered an adult relationship with our emotional security intact, only to discover we were in a
relationship with an alcoholic. Nothing will destroy emotional security more quickly than loving someone who isalcoholic or has any other compulsive disorder. These diseases demand us to center our lives around them. Confusion,chaos, and despair reign. Even the healthiest of us may begin to doubt ourselves after living with an alcoholic. Needs gounmet. Love disappears. The needs become greater and so does the self-doubt. Alcoholism creates emotionally insecurepeople. Alcoholism creates victims of us-
 
page_103
Page 104
drinkers and nondrinkers, alikeand we doubt our ability to take care of ourselves.
If we have decided, for whatever reason, that we can't take care of ourselves, I have good news. The theme of this book is
encouragement to begin taking care of ourselves. The purpose of this chapter is to say we can  take care of ourselves. We
are not helpless. Being ourselves and being responsible for ourselves do not have to be so painful and scary. We canhandle things, whatever life brings our way. We don't have to be so dependent on the people around us. Unlike Siamesetwins, we can live without any particular human being. As one woman put it: "For years, I kept telling myself I couldn'tlive without a particular man. I was wrong. I've had four husbands. They're all dead, and I'm still living." Knowing wecan live without someone does not mean we have to live without that person, but it may free us to love and live in waysthat work.
Now, let me give what I shall call the "rest" of the news. There is no magic, easy, overnight way to become undependent.Emotional security and our present level of insecurity are penetrating issues that we must keep in mind as we make our
decisions. Sometimes we become financially as well as emotionally dependent on a person, and we are then faced withtwo real concernstwo concerns that may or may not be connected. 7 Neither issue is to be taken lightly; each demandsconsideration. My words or our hopes will not diminish the reality of these facts. If we are financially or emotionallydependent, that is a fact, and facts need to be accepted and taken into account. But I believe we can strive to become lessdependent. And I know we can become undependent, if we want to.
Here are some ideas that may help:
1. Finish  up business from our  childhoods, as best as we can. Grieve. Get some perspective. Figure out how events from
our childhoods are affecting what we're doing now.A client who has been in committed love relationships with two alcoholics told me the following story. Her father left
home when she was five years old. He had been drunk for most of those five years. Although they lived in the same city,she rarely saw her father after he
 
page_104
Page 105
moved out. He visited her a few times after her mother divorced him, but there was no substance to the relationship. As
she grew up, she called her father from time to time to tell him about important events in her life: high school graduation,her marriage, the birth of her first child, her divorce, her remarriage, her second pregnancy. Each time she called, herfather talked to her for five minutes, mentioned seeing her sometime, then hung up. She said she didn't feel particularlyhurt or angry; she expected this from him. He had never been there for her. He never would be there for her. He didn'tparticipate in the relationship. There was nothing, including love, coming back from him. But it was a fact of life, and itdid not particularly upset her. She truly thought she had resigned herself to and dealt with her father's alcoholism. Thisrelationship went on this way for years. Her relationships with alcoholics went on for years.
When she was in the midst of her most recent divorce, the phone rang one evening. It was her father. It was the first time
he had ever called her. Her heart nearly jumped out of her chest, she reported later. Her father asked how she and herfamily werea question he usually avoided. Just as she was wondering if she could tell him about her divorce (somethingshe wanted to do; she had always wanted to cry and be comforted by her father) he began whining about how he hadbeen locked up in a psychiatric ward, he had no rights, it wasn't fair, and couldn't she do something to help him? Shequickly wrapped up the conversation, hung up the phone, sat down on the floor, and bawled.
"I remember sitting on the floor screaming: 'You've never been there for me. Never. And now I need you. I let myself
need you just once, and you weren't there for me. Instead, you wanted me to take care of you.'
"When I quit crying, I felt strangely peaceful," she said. "I think it was the first time I ever let myself grieve or get angry
at my father. Over the next few weeks, I began to understandreally understand. Of course he had never been there for me.He was an alcoholic. He had never been there for anyone, including himself. I also began to realize that underneath mysophisticated veneer, I felt unlovable. Very unlovable. Somewhere, hidden inside me, I had maintained a fantasy that Ihad a loving
 
page_105
Page 106
father who was staying away from mewho was rejecting mebecause I wasn't good enough. There was something wrong
with me. Now I knew the truth. It wasn't me that was unlovable. It wasn't me that was screwed up, although I know I'vegot problems. It was he.
"Something happened to me after that," she said. "I no longer need an alcoholic to love me. The truth has indeed set me
free."
I am not suggesting that all of this woman's problems were solved when she finished her grieving or by one moment of
awareness. She may have more grieving to do; she still needs to deal with her codependent characteristics. But I thinkwhat happened helped her.
2. Nurture and cherish that frightened, vulnerable, needy child inside us.  The child may never completely disappear, no
matter how self-sufficient we become. Stress may cause the child to cry out. Unprovoked, the child may come out and
demand attention when we least expect it.
I had a dream about this that I think illustrates the point. In my dream, a girl about nine years old had been left alone,
abandoned by her mother for several days and nights. Without supervision, the child ran around the neighborhood late at
night. She didn't cause any serious problems. She seemed to be looking for something, trying to fill her empty hours. The
child did not want to stay in her house alone when it got dark. The loneliness was too frightening. When the mother
finally returned, the neighbors approached her and complained about this child running all over, unsupervised. Themother became angry, and started yelling at the child for her misbehavior. "I told you to stay in the house while I wasgone. I told you to not cause problems, didn't I?" the mother screamed. The child offered no retort, didn't even cry. Shejust stood there with downcast eyes and quietly said, "I think I have a stomachache."
Don't pound on that vulnerable child when he or she doesn't want to stay in the dark all alone, when he or she becomes
frightened. We don't have to let the child make our choices for us, but don't ignore the child either. Listen to the child.Let the child cry if he or she needs to. Comfort the child. Figure out what he or she needs.
 
page_106
Page 107
3. Stop looking for happiness in other people. Our source of happiness and well-being is not inside others; it's inside us.
Learn to center ourselves in ourselves.
Stop centering and focusing on other people. Settle down with and in ourselves. Stop seeking so much approval and
validation from others. We don't need the approval of everyone and anyone. We only need our approval. We have all thesame sources for happiness and making choices inside us that others do. Find and develop our own internal supply ofpeace, wellbeing, and self-esteem. Relationships help, but they cannot be our source. Develop personal cores ofemotional security with ourselves.
4. We can learn to depend on ourselves. Maybe other people haven't been therefor us, but we can start being therefor us.Stop abandoning ourselves, our needs, our wants, our feelings, our lives, and everything that comprises us. Make a
commitment to always be there for ourselves. We can trust ourselves. We can handle and cope with the events, problems,and feelings life throws our way. We can trust our feelings and our judgments. We can solve our problems. We can learnto live with our unsolved problems, too. We must trust the people we are learning to depend uponourselves.
5. We can depend on God, too. He's there, and He cares. Our spiritual beliefs can provide us with a strong sense of
emotional security.
Let me illustrate this idea. One night, when I lived in a rough neighborhood, I had to walk down the alley behind my
house to get to my car. I asked my husband to watch from a window on the second floor to make sure nothing happenedto me. He agreed. As I walked across the backyard, away from the security of my home and into the blackness of thenight, I began to feel afraid. I turned around and saw my husband in the window. He was watching; he was there.Immediately, the fear left, and I felt comforted and safe. It occurred to me that I believe in God, and I can find the samefeelings of comfort and security in knowing that He is always watching over my life. I strive to look to this security.
Some codependents begin to believe God has abandoned us. We have had so much pain. So many needs have gone
unmet, sometimes for
 
page_107
Page 108
so long that we may cry out, ''Where has God gone? Why has He gone away? Why has He let this happen? Why won't
He help? Why has He abandoned me?''
God hasn't abandoned us. We abandoned ourselves. He's there, and He cares. But He expects us to cooperate by caring
for ourselves.
6. Strive for undependence. Begin examining the ways we are dependent, emotionally and financially, on the people
around us .
Start taking care of ourselves whether we are in relationships that we intend to continue, or whether we are inrelationships we are trying to get out of. In The Cinderella Complex, Colette Dowling suggested doing this with anattitude of "courageous vulnerability." 8 That means: You feel scared, but you do it anyway.
We can feel our feelings, talk about our fears, accept ourselves and our present conditions, and then get started on the
journey toward undependence. We can do it. We don't have to feel strong all the time to be undependent and taking careof ourselves. We can and probably will have feelings of fear, weakness, and even hopelessness. That is normal and evenhealthy. Real power comes from feeling our feelings, not from ignoring them. Real strength comes, not from pretendingto be strong all the time, but from acknowledging our weaknesses and vulnerabilities when we feel this way.
Many of us have dark nights. Many of us have uncertainty, loneliness, and the pang of needs and wants that beg to be
met and yet go seemingly unnoticed. Sometimes the way is foggy and slippery, and we have no hope. All we can feel isfear. All we can see is the dark. I was driving one night in weather like this. I don't like driving, and I particularly don'tlike driving in bad weather. I was stiff and frightened at the wheel. I could barely see; the headlights were onlyilluminating a few feet of the road. I was almost blind. I started to panic. Anything could happen! Then, a calmingthought entered my mind. The path was only lit for a few feet, but each time I progressed those few feet, a new sectionwas lit. It didn't matter that I couldn't see far ahead. If I relaxed, I could see as far as I needed for the moment. Thesituation wasn't ideal, but I could get through it if I stayed calm and worked with what was available.
 
page_108
Page 109
You can get through dark situations, too. You can take care of yourself and trust yourself. Trust God. Go as far as you
can see, and by the time you get there, you'll be able to see farther.
It's called One Day at a Time.
Activity
1. Examine the following characteristics, and decide if you are in a dependent (addicted) or healthy (love) relationship:
 
page_109
Page 110
CHARACTERISTICS
LOVE ADDICTION
(OPEN SYSTEM) (CLOSED SYSTEM)
Room to grow,
expand; desire for Dependent, based on security and
other to grow. comfort; use intensity of need and
infatuation as proof of love (mayreally be fear, insecurity, loneliness).
Separate interests;
other friends; Total involvement; limited social
maintain othermeaningfulrelationships. life; neglect old friends, interests.
Encouragement ofeach other's ex-panding; secure inown worth.Preoccupation with other's behavior; dependent onother's approval for own identity and self- worth.
Trust; openness. Jealousy, possessiveness, fears
competition, "protects supply."
Mutual integrity
preserved. One partner's needs suspended for
the other's; self-deprivation.
Willingness to risk
and be real. Search for perfect invulnerability
eliminates possible risks.
Room for exploration
of feelings in and ofrelationship. Reassurance through repeated, ritualized activity.
Ability to enjoy beingalone.Intoleranceunable to endure separations (even inconflict); hang on even tighter. Undergo with-drawalloss of appetite, rest- less, lethargic,disoriented agony.
 
page_110
Page 111
BREAKUPS
Accept breakup without feeling a Feel inadequate, worthless; often
loss of own adequacy and self- one-sided decision.
worth.
Wants best for partner, though Violent ending-often hate other;
apart; can become friends. try to inflict pain; manipulation toget other back.
ONE-SIDED ADDICTION
Denial, fantasy; overestimation ofother's commitment.Seeks solutions outside self-drugs, alcohol, new lover, changeof situation. 9
 
page_111
Page 113
10
Live Your Own Life
Live and let live. 
Twelve Step program slogan
If I make one point in this book, I hope it is that the surest way to make ourselves crazy is to get involved in other
people's business, and the quickest way to become sane and happy is to tend to our own affairs.
I have discussed concepts and ideas pertaining to that thought. We've examined reactions typical of codependency. We've
discussed ways of learning how to react differently using detachment. But, after we've detached and taken our grip offthe people around us, what's left? Each of us is left with ourselves.
I remember the day I faced that truth. For a long time I had blamed my unfortunate circumstances on other people. "You
are the reason I am the way I am!" I had screeched. "Look what you made me dowith my minutes, my hours, my life."After I detached and took responsibility for myself, I wondered, maybe other people weren't the reason I hadn't beenliving my own life; maybe they were just the excuse I needed. My destinymy todays and tomorrowslooked pretty glum.
Living our lives may not be an exciting prospect to some of us either. Maybe we've been so wrapped up in other people
that we've forgotten how to live and enjoy our lives.
We may be in so much emotional distress we think we have no life; all we are is our pain. That's not true. We are more
than our problems. We can be more than our problems. We will be more than our prob-
 
page_113
Page 114
lems. 1 Just because life has been this painful so far doesn't mean it has to keep hurting. Life doesn't have to hurt so
much, and it won'tif we begin to change. It may not be all roses from here on out, but it doesn't have to be all thornseither. We need to and can develop our own lives. As one friend says, "Get a life."
Some codependents think a life with no future, no purpose, no great shakes, and no great breaks isn't worth living. That's
not true, either. I believe God has exciting, interesting things in store for each of us. I believe there is an enjoyable,worthwhile purposebesides taking care of people and being an appendage to someonefor each of us. I believe we tap intothis attitude by taking care of ourselves. We begin to cooperate. We open ourselves up to the goodness and richnessavailable in us and to us. 2
Throughout this book I have used the phrase taking care of ourselves. I have heard that phrase used and abused. I haveheard people use it to control, impose upon, or force their wills on people. (I dropped in, uninvited, with my five kids andcat. We're going to spend the week. I'm just taking care of myself) I have heard the phrase used manipulatively to justifypersecuting and punishing people, instead of dealing appropriately with angry feelings. (I'm going to holler and scream atyou all day because you didn't do what I wanted you to do. Don't get mad at me though. I'm just taking care of myself.) Ihave heard people use these words to avoid responsibility. (I know my son is up in his bedroom shooting heroin, butthat's his problem. I'm not going to worry. I'm going to the store and charge $500, and I'm not going to worry about howI'll pay that either. I'm just taking care of myself.)
Those behaviors are not what I mean by taking care of ourselves. Self-care is an attitude toward ourselves and our lives
that says, I am responsible for myself. I am responsible for leading or not living my life. I am responsible for tending tomy spiritual, emotional, physical, and financial well-being. I am responsible for identifying and meeting my needs. I amresponsible for solving my problems or learning to live with those I cannot solve. I am responsible for my choices. I amresponsible for what I give and receive. I am also responsible for setting and achieving
 
page_114
Page 115
my goals. I am responsible for how much I enjoy life, for how much pleasure I find in daily activities. I am responsible
for whom I love and how I choose to express this love. I am responsible for what I do to others and for what I allowothers to do to me. I am responsible for my wants and desires. All of me, every aspect of my being, is important. I count
for something. I matter. My feelings can be trusted. My thinking is appropriate. I value my wants and needs. I do not
deserve and will not tolerate abuse or constant mistreatment. I have rights, and it is my responsibility to assert these
rights. The decisions I make and the way I conduct myself will reflect my high self-esteem. My decisions will take intoaccount my responsibilities to myself.
My decisions will also take into account my responsibilities to other peoplemy spouse, my children, my relatives, my
friends. I will examine and decide exactly what these responsibilities are as I make my decisions. I will also consider therights of those around methe right to live their lives as they see fit. I do not have the right to impose on others' rights totake care of themselves, and they have no right to impose on my rights.
Self-care is an attitude of mutual respect. It means learning to live our lives responsibly. It means allowing others to live
their lives as they choose, as long as they don't interfere with our decisions to live as we choose. Taking care ofourselves is not as selfish as some people assume it is, but neither is it as selfless as many codependents believe.
In the chapters that follow, we will discuss some specific ways of taking care of ourselves: goal setting, dealing with
feelings, working a Twelve Step program, and more. I believe taking care of ourselves is an art, and this art involves onefundamental idea that is foreign to many: giving ourselves what we need.
This may be a shock to us and our family systems at first. Most codependents don't ask for what we need. Many
codependents don't know or haven't given much thought to what we want and need. (Throughout this book, I have usedand will use the terms needs and wants interchangeably. I consider wants and needs important, and I will treat theseterms with equal respect.)
 
page_115
Page 116
Many of us have falsely believed our needs aren't important and we shouldn't mention them. Some of us even began to
believe our needs are bad or wrong, so we've learned to repress them and push them out of our awareness. We haven'tlearned to identify what we need, or listen to what we need because it didn't matter anywayour needs weren't going to getmet. Some of us haven't learned how to get our needs met appropriately.
Giving ourselves what we need is not difficult. I believe we can learn quickly. The formula is simple: In any given
situation, detach and ask, "What do I need to do to take care of myself?"
Then we need to listen to ourselves and to our Higher Power. Respect what we hear. This insane business of punishing
ourselves for what we think, feel, and wantthis nonsense of not listening to who we are and what our selves arestruggling to tell usmust stop. How do you think God works with us? As I've said before, no wonder we think God hasabandoned us; we've abandoned ourselves. We can be gentle with ourselves and accept ourselves. We're not only ormerely human, we were created and intended to be human. And we can be compassionate with ourselves. Then, perhaps,we may develop true compassion for others. 3 Listen to what our precious self is telling us about what we need.
Maybe we need to hurry and get to an appointment. Maybe we need to slow down and take the day off work. Maybe we
need exercise or a nap. We might need to be alone. We may want to be around people. Maybe we need a job. Maybe weneed to work less. Maybe we need a hug, a kiss, or a back rub.
Sometimes giving ourselves what we need means giving ourselves something fun: a treat, a new hairdo, a new dress, a
new pair of shoes, a new toy, an evening at the theater, or a trip to the Bahamas. Sometimes, giving ourselves what weneed is work. We need to eliminate or develop a certain characteristic; we need to work on a relationship; or we need totend to our responsibilities to other people or to our responsibilities to ourselves. Giving ourselves what we need does notonly mean giving presents to ourselves; it means doing what's necessary to live responsiblynot an excessively responsibleor an irresponsible existence.
 
page_116
Page 117
Our needs are different and vary from moment to moment and day to day. Are we feeling the crazy anxiety that goes
with codependency? Maybe we need to go to an Al-Anon meeting. Are our thoughts negative and despairing? Maybe we
need to read a meditation or inspirational book. Are we worried about a physical problem? Maybe we need to go to a
doctor. Are the kids going wild? Maybe we need to figure out a family plan for discipline. Are people stomping on our
rights? Set some boundaries. Are our stomachs churning with emotions? Deal with our feelings. Maybe we need todetach, slow down, make an amend, do an intervention, initiate a relationship, or file for divorce. It's up to us. What dowe think we need to do?
Besides giving ourselves what we need, we begin to ask people for what we need and want from them because this is
part of taking care of ourselves and being a responsible human being.
Giving ourselves what we need means we become, as the Reverend Phil L. Hansen suggests, our personal counselor,
confidante, spiritual advisor, partner, best friend, and caretaker in this exciting, new venture we have undertakenlivingour own lives. The Reverend Hansen is nationally active in the addiction field. We base all our decisions on reality, andwe make them in our best interests. We take into account our responsibilities to other people, because that is whatresponsible people do. But we also know we count. We try to eliminate "shoulds" from our decisions and learn to trustourselves. If we listen to ourselves and our Higher Power, we will not be misled. Giving ourselves what we need andlearning to live self-directed lives requires faith. We need enough faith to get on with our lives, and we need to do atleast a little something each day to begin moving forward.
As we learn how to care for and meet our own needs, we forgive ourselves when we make mistakes and we congratulate
ourselves when we do well. We also get comfortable doing some things poorly and some things with mediocrity, for thatis part of life too. We learn to laugh at ourselves and our humanity, but we don't laugh when we need to cry. We takeourselves seriously but not too seriously.
 
page_117
Page 118
Ultimately, we may even discover this astounding truth: Few situations in life are ever improved by not taking care of
ourselves and not giving ourselves what we need. In fact, we may learn most situations are improved when we take careof ourselves and tend to our needs.
I am learning to identify how to take care of myself. I know many people who have either learned or are learning to do
this too. I believe all codependents can.
Activity
1. As you go through the days ahead, stop and ask yourself what you need to do to take care of yourself. Do it as often as
you need to, but do it at least once daily. If you are going through a crisis, you may need to do it every hour. Then giveyourself what you need.
2. What do you need from the people around you? At an appropriate time, sit down with them and discuss what you need
from them.
 
page_118
Page 119
11Have a Love Affair With Yourself
This above all:to thine own self be true,and it must follow, as the night the day,thou canst not then be false to any man.William Shakespeare
''Love thy neighbor as thyself.'' The problem with many codependents is we do just that. What's worse, many of us
wouldn't dream of loving or treating other people the way we treat ourselves. We wouldn't dare, and others probably
wouldn't let us.
Most codependents suffer from that vague but penetrating affliction, low self-worth. We don't feel good about ourselves,
we don't like ourselves, and we wouldn't consider loving ourselves. For some of us, low self-worth is an understatement.We don't merely dislike ourselves, we hate ourselves. 1
We don't like the way we look. We can't stand our bodies. We think we're stupid, incompetent, untalented, and, in many
cases, unlovable. 2 We think our thoughts are wrong and inappropriate. We think our feelings are wrong and
inappropriate. We believe we're not important, and even if our feelings aren't wrong, we think they don't matter. We'reconvinced our needs aren't important. And we shame someone else's desires or plans. We think we're inferior to anddifferent from the rest of the worldnot unique, but oddly and inappropriately different.
 
page_119
Page 120
We have never come to grips with ourselves, and we look at ourselves not through rose-colored glasses but through a
dirty, brownish-gray film.
We may have learned to disguise our true feelings about ourselves by dressing right, fixing our hair right, living in the
right home, and working at the right job. We may boast of our accomplishments, but underneath the trappings lies adungeon where we secretly and incessantly punish and torture ourselves. At times, we may punish ourselves openlybefore the whole world, by saying demeaning things about ourselves. Sometimes, we even invite others to help us hateourselves, such as when we allow certain people or religious customs to help us feel guilty, or when we allow people tohurt us. But our worst beatings go on privately, inside our minds.
We pick on ourselves endlessly, heaping piles of shoulds on our conscience and creating mounds of worthless, stinking
guilt. Don't confuse this with true, authentic guilt, which motivates change, teaches valuable lessons, and brings us into aclose relationship with ourselves, others, and our Higher Power. We constantly put ourselves in impossible situationswhere we have no choice but to feel badly about ourselves. We think a thought, then tell ourselves we shouldn't think thatway. We feel a feeling, then tell ourselves we shouldn't feel that way. We make a decision, act on it, then tell ourselveswe shouldn't have acted that way. There is nothing to correct in these situations, no amends to make; we have donenothing wrong. We are engaged in a form of punishment designed to keep us feeling anxious, upset, and stifled. We trapourselves.
One of my favorite forms of self-torture involves a dilemma between two things to do. I make a decision to do one of
them first. The minute I act on this decision, I say: "I should be doing the other thing." So I switch gears, begin doing theother thing, and I start in on myself again: "I really shouldn't be doing this. I should be doing what I was doing before."Another one of my favorites is this: I fix my hair, put on makeup, look in the mirror, and say, "Gee, I look weird. Ishouldn't look this way."
Some of us believe we have made such bad mistakes that we can't reasonably expect forgiveness. Some of us believe our
lives are a mistake. Many of us believe everything we've done is a mistake. A few of us believe
 
page_120
Page 121
we can't do anything right, but at the same time, we demand perfection of ourselves. We put ourselves in impossible
situations, then wonder why we can't get out.
Then we finish the job by shaming ourselves. We don't like what we do, and we don't like who we are. Fundamentally,
we are not good enough. For some reason, God created in us a person totally inappropriate for life.
In codependency, as in many other areas of life, everything is connected to everything, and one thing leads to another. In
this case, our low self-worth is frequently connected to much of what we do or don't do, and it leads to many of ourproblems.
As codependents, we frequently dislike ourselves so much that we believe it's wrong to take ourselves into account, in
other words, appear selfish. Putting ourselves first is out of the question. Often, we think we're only worth something if
we do things for others or caretake, so we never say no. Anyone as insignificant as us must go an extra mile to be liked.No one in their right minds could like and enjoy being with us. We think we have to do something for people to get andkeep their friendships. Much of the defensiveness I've seen in codependents comes not because we think we're abovecriticism, but because we have so little self-worth that any perceived attack threatens to annihilate us. We feel so badabout ourselves and have such a need to be perfect and avoid shame that we cannot allow anyone to tell us aboutsomething we've done wrong. One reason some of us nag and criticize other people is because that's what we do toourselves.
I believe, as Earnie Larsen and other authorities do, that our low self-worth or self-hatred is tied into all aspects of our
codependency: martyrdom, refusal to enjoy life; workaholism, staying so busy we can't enjoy life; perfectionism, notallowing ourselves to enjoy or feel good about the things we do; procrastination, heaping piles of guilt and uncertainty onourselves; and preventing intimacy with people such as running from relationships, avoiding commitment, staying indestructive relationships; initiating relationships with people who are not good for us, and avoiding people who are goodfor us.
 
page_121
Page 122
We can find endless means of torturing ourselves: overeating, neglecting our needs, comparing ourselves to others,
competing with people, obsessing, dwelling on painful memories, or imagining future painful scenes. We think, what ifshe drinks again? What if she has an affair? What if a tornado hits the house? This "what if" attitude is always good for astrong dose of fear. We scare ourselves, then wonder why we feel so frightened.
We don't like ourselves, and we're not going to let ourselves get any of the good stuff because we believe we don't
deserve it.
As codependents, we tend to enter into totally antagonistic relationships with ourselves. 3 Some of us learned these self-
hating behaviors in our families, possibly with the help of an alcoholic parent. Some of us reinforced our self-disdain byleaving an alcoholic parent and marrying an alcoholic. We may have entered into adult relationships with fragile self-worth, then discovered our remaining self-esteem disintegrated. A few of us may have had our self-worth completelyintact until we met him or her or until that problem came along; we suddenly or gradually found ourselves hatingourselves. Alcoholism and other compulsive disorders destroy self-worth in alcoholics and codependents. Remember,alcoholism and other compulsive disorders are self-destructive. Some of us may not even be aware of our low self-esteem and self-hatred because we have been comparing ourselves to the alcoholics and other crazy people in our lives;by comparison, we come out on top. Low self-worth can sneak up on us any time we let it.
Actually, it doesn't matter when we began torturing ourselves. We must stop now. Right now, we can give ourselves a
big emotional and mental hug. We are okay. It's wonderful to be who we are. Our thoughts are okay. Our feelings areappropriate. We're right where we're supposed to be today, this moment. There is nothing wrong with us. There isnothing fundamentally wrong with us. If we've done wrongs, that's okay; we were doing the best we could.
In all our codependency, with all our controlling, rescuing, and assorted character defects, we are okay. We are exactly
as we are meant to be. I've talked a lot about problems, issues, and things to changethese
 
page_122
Page 123
are goals, things we will do to enhance our lives. Who we are right now is okay. In fact, codependents are some of the
most loving, generous, good-hearted, and concerned people I know. We've just allowed ourselves to be tricked into doingthings that hurt us, and we're going to learn how to stop doing those things. But those tricks are our problems; they arenot us. If we have one character defect that is abhorrent, it is the way we hate and pick on ourselves. That is simply nottolerable nor acceptable any longer. We can stop picking on ourselves for picking on ourselves. 4 This habit is not ourfault either, but it is our responsibility to learn to stop doing it.
We can cherish ourselves and our lives. We can nurture ourselves and love ourselves. We can accept our wonderful
selves, with all our faults, foibles, strong points, weak points, feelings, thoughts, and everything else. It's the best thing
we've got going for us. It's who we are, and who we were meant to be. And it's not a mistake. We are the greatest thing
that will ever happen to us. Believe it. It makes life much easier.
The only difference between codependents and the rest of the world is that the other people don't pick on themselves for
being who they are. All people think similar thoughts and have a range of feelings. All people make mistakes and do afew things right. So we can leave ourselves alone.
We aren't second-class citizens. We don't deserve to lead secondhand lives. And we don't deserve second-best
relationships! We are lovable, and we are worth getting to know. People who love and like us aren't stupid or inferior fordoing that. We have a right to be happy. 5 We deserve good things.
The people who look the most beautiful are the same as us. The only difference is they're telling themselves they lookgood, and they're letting themselves shine through. The people who say the most profound, intelligent, or witty things arethe same as us. They're letting go, being who they are. The people who appear the most confident and relaxed are nodifferent from us. They've pushed themselves through fearful situations and told themselves they could make it. Thepeople who are successful are the same as us. They've gone ahead and developed their gifts and talents, and set goals forthemselves. We're even the same as the people
 
page_123
Page 124
on television: our heroes, our idols. We're all working with approximately the same materialhumanity. It's how we feel
about ourselves that makes the difference. It's what we tell ourselves that makes the difference.
We are good. We are good enough. We are appropriate to life. Much of our anxiety and fearfulness stems, I believe,
from constantly telling ourselves that we're just not up to facing the world and all its situations. Nathaniel Branden callsthis "a nameless sense of being unfit for reality." 6 I'm here to say we are fit for reality. Relax. Wherever we need to goand whatever we need to do, we are appropriate for that situation. We will do fine. Relax. It's okay to be who we are.Who or what else can we be? Just do our best at whatever we are called upon to do. What more can we do? Sometimes,we can't even do our best; that's okay, too. We may have feelings, thoughts, fears, and vulnerabilities as we go throughlife, but we all do. We need to stop telling ourselves we're different for doing and feeling what everyone else does.
We need to be good to ourselves. We need to be compassionate and kind to ourselves. How can we expect to take care
of ourselves appropriately if we hate or dislike ourselves?
We need to refuse to enter into an antagonistic relationship with ourselves. Quit blaming ourselves and being victimized,
and take responsible steps to remove the victim. Put the screws to guilt. Shame and guilt serve no long-term purpose.They are only useful to momentarily indicate when we may have violated our own moral codes. Guilt and shame are notuseful as a way of life. Stop the "shoulds." Become aware of when we're punishing and torturing ourselves and make aconcerted effort to tell ourselves positive messages. If we should be doing something, do it. If we're torturing ourselves,stop it. It gets easier. We can laugh at ourselves, tell ourselves we won't be tricked, give ourselves a hug, then go aboutthe business of living as we choose. If we have real guilt, deal with it. God will forgive us. He knows we did our best,even if it was our worst. We don't have to punish ourselves by feeling guilty to prove to God or anyone else how muchwe care. 7 We need to forgive ourselves. Take the Fourth and Fifth Steps (see the chapter on working a Twelve Step pro-
 
page_124
Page 125
gram); talk to a clergy person; talk to God; make amends; and then be done with it.
We need to stop shaming ourselves. Shame, like guilt, serves absolutely no extended purpose. If people tell us, directly or
indirectly, that we ought to be ashamed, we don't have to believe it. Hating or shaming ourselves doesn't help except fora moment. Name one situation that is improved by continuing to feel guilt or shame. Name one time when that hassolved a problem. How did it help? Most of the time, guilt and shame keep us so anxious we can't do our best. Guiltmakes everything harder.
We need to value ourselves and make decisions and choices that enhance our self-esteem.
"Each time you learn to act as if you are valuable, not desperate, you make it easier the next time," advises Toby Rice
Drew in Getting Them Sober 8
We can be gentle, loving, listening, attentive, and kind to ourselves, our feelings, thoughts, needs, wants, desires, and
everything we're made of. We can accept ourselvesall of us. Start where we're at, and we will become more. Develop ourgifts and talents. Trust ourselves. Assert ourselves. We can be trusted. Respect ourselves. Be true to ourselves. Honorourselves, for that is where our magic lies. That is our key to the world.
Following is an excerpt from Honoring the Self, an excellent book on self-esteem written by Nathaniel Branden. Read
closely what he writes.
Of all the judgments that we pass in life, none is as important as the one we pass on ourselves, for that judgment touches
the very center of our existence.
. . . No significant aspect of our thinking, motivation, feelings, or behavior is unaffected by our self-evaluation. . . .The first act of honoring the self is the assertion of consciousness: the choice to think, to be aware, to send the
searchlight of consciousness outward toward the world and inward toward our own being. To default on this effort is todefault on the self at the most basic level.
 
page_125
Page 126
To honor the self is to be willing to think independently, to live by our own mind, and to have the courage of our own
perceptions and judgments.
To honor the self is to be willing to know not only what we think but also what we feel, what we want, need, desire,
suffer over, are frightened or angered byand to accept our right to experience such feelings. The opposite of this attitudeis denial, disowning, repressionself-repudiation.
To honor the self is to preserve an attitude of self-acceptancewhich means to accept what we are, without self-oppression
or self-castigation, without any pretense about the truth of our own being, pretense aimed at deceiving either ourselves oranyone else.
To honor the self is to live authentically, to speak and act from our innermost convictions and feelings.To honor the self is to refuse to accept unearned guilt, and to do our best to correct such guilt as we may have earned.To honor the self is to be committed to our right to exist which proceeds from the knowledge that our life does not
belong to others and that we are not here on earth to live up to someone else's expectations. To many people, this is aterrifying responsibility.
To honor the self is to be in love with our own life, in love with our possibilities for growth and for experiencing joy, in
love with the process of discovery and exploring our distinctively human potentialities.
Thus we can begin to see that to honor the self is to practice selfishness in the highest, noblest, and least understood
sense of that word. And this, I shall argue, requires enormous independence, courage, and integrity. 9
We need to love ourselves and make a commitment to ourselves. We need to give ourselves some of the boundless
loyalty that so many codependents are willing to give others. Out of high self-esteem will come true acts of kindness andcharity, not selfishness.
 
page_126
Page 127
The love we give and receive will be enhanced by the love we give ourselves.
Activity
1. How do you feel about yourself? Write about it. Include the things you like or don't like about yourself. Reread what
you have written.
 
page_127
Page 129
12Learn the Art of Acceptance
I'd like to make a motion that we face reality. Bob Newhart, from the Bob Newhart Show
Accepting reality is touted and encouraged by most sane people. It is the goal of many therapies, as well it should be.
Facing and coming to terms with what is is a beneficial act. Acceptance brings peace. It is frequently the turning point forchange. It is also much easier said than done.
People, not just codependents, are faced daily with the prospect of either accepting or rejecting the reality of that
particular day and present circumstances. We have many things to accept in the course of normal living from themoment we open our eyes in the morning until we close them at night. Our present circumstances include who we are,where we live, who we live with or without, where we work, our method of transportation, how much money we have,what our responsibilities are, what we shall do for fun, and any problems that arise. Some days, accepting thesecircumstances is a breeze. It comes naturally. Our hair behaves, our kids behave, the boss is reasonable, the money'sright, the house is clean, the car works, and we like our spouse or lover. We know what to expect, and what we expect isacceptable. It's okay. Other days might not go so well. The brakes go out on the car, the roof leaks, the kids sass, webreak an arm, we lose our job, or our spouse or lover says he or she doesn't love us any more. Something has happened.We have a problem. Things are different. Things are changing. We're losing something. Our present circumstances are nolonger as comfortable as they were. Circumstances
 
page_129
Page 130
have been altered, and we have a new situation to accept. We may initially respond by denying or resisting the change,
problem, or loss. We want things to be the way they were. We want the problem to be quickly solved. We want to becomfortable again. We want to know what to expect. We are not peaceful with reality. It feels awkward. We havetemporarily lost our balance.
Codependents never know what to expect, particularly if we are in a close relationship with an alcoholic, a drug addict, a
criminal, a gambler, or any other person with a serious problem or compulsive disorder. We are bombarded by problems,losses, and change. We endure shattered windows, missed appointments, broken promises, and outright lies. We losefinancial security, emotional security, faith in the people we love, faith in God, and faith in ourselves. We may lose ourphysical well-being, our material goods, our ability to enjoy sex, our reputation, our social life, our career, our self-control, our self-esteem, and ourselves.
Some of us lose respect for and trust in the people we love. Sometimes we even lose our love for and our commitment to
a person we once loved. This is common. It is a natural, normal consequence of the disease. The booklet, A Guide for theFamily of the Alcoholic discusses this:
''Love cannot exist without the dimension of justice. Love must also have compassion which means to bear with or to
suffer with a person. Compassion does not mean to suffer because of the injustice of a person. Yet injustice is oftensuffered repeatedly by families of alcoholics.'' 1
Even though this injustice is common, it makes it no less painful. Betrayal can be overwhelming when someone we love
does things that deeply hurt us.
Perhaps the most painful loss many codependents face is the loss of our dreams, the hopeful and sometimes idealistic
expectations for the future that most people have. This loss can be the most difficult to accept. As we looked at our childin the hospital nursery, we had certain hopes for him or her. Those hopes didn't include our child having a problem withalcohol or other drugs. Our dreams didn't include this. On our wedding day, we had dreams. The future with our belovedwas full of wonder and promise. This was the start of something great, something
 
page_130
Page 131
loving, something we had long hoped for. The dreams and promises may have been spoken or unspoken but for most of
us, they were there.
"For each couple the beginning is different," wrote Janet Woititz in an article from the book Co-Dependency, An
Emerging Issue. "Even so, the process that occurs in the chemically dependent marital relationship is essentially thesame. For the starting point, let's take a look at the marriage vows. Most wedding services include the followingstatementsfor better or worsefor richer or poorerin sickness and in healthuntil death do us part. Maybe that's where all thetrouble began. Did you mean what you said when you said it? If you knew at that time that you were going to have notthe better but the worse, not the health but the sickness, not the richer but the poorer, would the love that you felt havemade it worth it? You may say yes, but I wonder. If you were more realistic than romantic you may have interpreted thevows to meanthrough the bad as well as the good, assuming that the bad times would be transitory and the good onespermanent. The contract is entered into in good faith. There is no benefit of hindsight." 2
The dreams were there. Many of us held on for so long, clutching those dreams through one loss and disappointment
after another. We flew in the face of reality, shaking these dreams at the truth, refusing to believe or accept anything less.But one day the truth caught up to us and refused to be put off any longer. This wasn't what we wanted, planned on,asked for, or hoped for. It never would be. The dream was dead, and it would never breathe again.
Some of us may have had our dreams and hopes crushed. Some of us may be facing the failure of something extremely
important such as marriage or another important relationship. I know there's a lot of pain at the prospect of losing love orlosing the dreams we had. There's nothing we can say to make that less painful or to lessen our grief. It hurts deeply tohave our dreams destroyed by alcoholism or any other problem. The disease is deadly. It kills everything in sight,including our noblest dreams. "Chemical dependency destroys slowly, but thoroughly," concluded Janet Woititz.3 Howtrue. How sadly true. And nothing dies slower or more painfully than a dream.
 
page_131
Page 132
Even recovery brings losses, more changes we must struggle to accept. 4 When an alcoholic spouse gets sober, things
change. Patterns of relating change. Our codependent characteristics, the ways we have been affected, are losses of self-image we must face. Although these are good changes, they are still losseslosses of things that may not have beendesirable but may have become oddly comfortable. These patterns became a fact of our present circumstances. At leastwe knew what to expect, even if that meant not expecting anything.
The losses many codependents must daily face and accept are enormous and ongoing. They are not the usual problems
and losses most people encounter as part of normal living. These are losses and problems which are caused by people wecare about. Although the problems are a direct result of an illness, condition, or compulsive disorder, they may appear asdeliberate and malicious acts. We are suffering at the hands of someone we loved and trusted.
We are continually off balance, struggling to accept changes and problems. We don't know what to expect, nor do we
know when to expect it. Our present circumstances are always in a state of flux. We may experience loss or change in allareas. We feel crazy; our kids are upset; our spouse or lover is acting crazy; the car has been repossessed; nobody hasworked for weeks; the house is a mess; and the money has dwindled. The losses may come barrelling down all at once,or they may occur gradually. Things then may stabilize briefly, until once more we lose the car, job, home, money, andrelationships with the people we care about. We dared to have hope, only to have our dreams smashed again. It doesn'tmatter that our hopes were falsely based on wishful thinking that the problem would magically go away. Crushed hopesare crushed hopes. Disappointments are disappointments. Lost dreams are dead dreams, and they all bring pain.
Accept reality? Half the time we don't even know what reality is. We're lied to; we lie to ourselves; and our heads are
spinning. The other half of the time, facing reality is simply more than we can bear, more than anyone can bear. Why
should it be so mysterious that denial is an integral part of alcoholism or any serious problem that causes ongoing
 
page_132
Page 133
losses? We have too much to accept; our present circumstances are overwhelming. Frequently, we are so caught up in
crises and chaos trying to solve other people's problems that we're too busy to worry about accepting anything. Yet, wemust sometime come to terms with what is. If things are ever to be any different, we must accept reality. If we are everto replace our lost dreams with new dreams and feel sane and peaceful again, we must accept reality.
Please understand acceptance does not mean adaptation. It doesn't mean resignation to the sorry and miserable way
things are. It doesn't mean accepting or tolerating any sort of abuse. It means, for the present moment, we acknowledgeand accept our circumstances, including ourselves and the people in our lives, as we and they are. It is only from thatstate that we have the peace and the ability to evaluate these circumstances, make appropriate changes, and solve ourproblems. A person who is being abused will not make the decisions necessary to stop that abuse until he or sheacknowledges the abuse. The person must then stop pretending the abuse will somehow magically end, stop pretending itdoesn't exist, or stop making excuses for its existence. In a state of acceptance we are able to respond responsibly to ourenvironment. In this state we receive the power to change the things we can. Alcoholics cannot quit drinking until theyaccept their powerlessness over alcohol and their alcoholism. People with eating disorders cannot solve their foodproblems until they accept their powerlessness over food. Codependents cannot change until we accept our codependentcharacteristicsour powerlessness over people, alcoholism, and other circumstances we have so desperately tried tocontrol. Acceptance is the ultimate paradox: we cannot change who we are until we accept ourselves the way we are.
Here is an excerpt from Honoring the Self on self-acceptance:
. . . If I can accept that I am who I am, that I feel what I feel, that I have done what I have doneif I can accept it
whether I like all of it or notthen I can accept myself. I can accept my shortcomings, my self-doubts, my poorself-esteem. And when I can accept all that, I have put myself on the side of reality rather than
 
page_133
Page 134
attempting to fight reality. I am no longer twisting my consciousness in knots to maintain delusions about mypresent condition. And so I clear the road for the first steps of strengthening my self-esteem. . . .
So long as we cannot accept the fact of what we are at any given moment of our existence, so long as we cannotpermit ourselves fully to be aware of the nature of our choices and actions, cannot admit the truth into ourconsciousness, we cannot change. 5
It has also been my experience that my Higher Power seems reluctant to intervene in my circumstances until I acceptwhat He has already given me. Acceptance is not forever. It is for the present moment. But it must be sincere and at gut-level.
How do we achieve this peaceful state? How do we stare at stark reality without blinking or covering our eyes? How do
we accept all the losses, changes, and problems that life and people hurl at us?
Not without a little kicking and screaming. We accept things through a five-step process. Elisabeth Kübler-Ross first
identified the stages and this process as the way dying people accept their death, the ultimate loss. 6 She called it the grief
process. Since then, mental health professionals have observed people go through these stages whenever they face anyloss. The loss could be minora five-dollar bill, not receiving an expected letteror it could be significantthe loss of aspouse through divorce or death, the loss of a job. Even positive change brings losswhen we buy a new house and leavethe old oneand requires a progression through the following five stages. 7
1. Denial
The first stage is denial. This is a state of shock, numbness, panic, and general refusal to accept or acknowledge reality.
We do everything and anything to put things back in place or pretend the situation isn't happening. There is much anxiety
and fear in this stage. Reactions typical of denial include: refusing to believe reality ("No, this can't be!"); denying
 
page_134
Page 135
or minimizing the importance of the loss ("It's no big deal."); denying any feelings about the loss ("I don't care."); or
mental avoidance (sleeping, obsessing, compulsive behaviors, and keeping busy). 8 We may feel somewhat detachedfrom ourselves, and our emotional responses may be flat, nonexistent, or inappropriate (laughing when we should becrying; crying when we should be happy).
I am convinced we do most of our codependent behaviors in this stage-obsessing, controlling, repressing feelings. I also
believe many of our feelings of "craziness" are connected to this state. We feel crazy because we are lying to ourselves.We feel crazy because we are believing other people's lies. Nothing will help us feel crazy faster than being lied to.Believing lies disrupts the core of our being. The deep, instinctive part of us knows the truth, but we are pushing that partaway and telling it, "You're wrong. Shut up." According to counselor Scott Egleston, we then decide there's somethingfundamentally wrong with us for being suspicious, and we label ourselves and our innermost, intuitive being asuntrustworthy.
We are not denying whatever we are denying because we are stupid, stubborn, or deficient. We are not even consciously
lying to ourselves. "Denial isn't lying," explained Noel Larsen, a licensed consulting psychologist. "It's not lettingyourself know what reality is."
Denial is the bugaboo of life. It's like sleeping. We aren't aware of our actions until we've done them. We, on some level,
really believe the lies we tell ourselves. There is a reason for that, too.
"In times of great stress, we shut down our awareness emotionally, sometimes intellectually, and occasionally
physically," explained Claudia L Jewett in Helping Children Cope with Separation and Loss. "A built-in mechanismoperates to screen out devastating information and to prevent us from becoming overloaded. Psychologists tell us denialis a conscious or unconscious defense that all of us use to avoid, reduce, or prevent anxiety when we are threatened,"Jewett continued. "We use it to shut out our awareness of things that would be too disturbing to know." 9
 
page_135
Page 136
Denial is the shock absorber for the soul. It is an instinctive and natural reaction to pain, loss, and change. It protects us.It wards off the blows of life until we can gather our other coping resources.
2. Anger
When we have quit denying our loss, we move into the next stage: anger. Our anger may be reasonable or unreasonable.
We may be justified in venting our wrath, or we may irrationally vent our fury on anything and anyone. We may blameourselves, God, and everyone around us for what we have lost. Depending on the nature of the loss, we may be a littlepeeved, somewhat angry, downright furious, or caught in the grips of a soul-shaking rage.
This is why setting someone straight, showing someone the light, or confronting a serious problem often does not turn
out the way we expect. If we are denying a situation, we won't move directly into acceptance of realitywe'll move intoanger. That is also why we need to be careful about major confrontations.
"The vocation of putting people straight, of tearing off their masks, of forcing them to face the repressed truth, is a highly
dangerous and destructive calling," wrote John Powell in Why Am I Afraid To Tell You Who I Am? "He cannot live withsome realization. In one way or another, he keeps his psychological pieces intact by some form of self-deception . . . Ifthe psychological pieces come unglued, who will pick them up and put poor Humpty Dumpty Human Being togetheragain?" 10
I have witnessed frightening and violent acts when people finally face a long-denied truth. If we are planning an
intervention, we need to seek professional help.
3. Bargaining
After we have calmed down, we attempt to strike a bargain with life, ourselves, another person, or God. If we do such
and such or if someone else does this or that, then we won't have to suffer the loss. We are not attempting to postpone theinevitable; we are attempting to prevent it.
 
page_136
Page 137
Sometimes the deals we negotiate are reasonable and productive: "If my spouse and I get counseling, then we won't have
to lose our relationship." Sometimes our bargains are absurd: "I used to think if I just kept the house cleaner or if Icleaned the refrigerator good enough this time, then my husband wouldn't drink any more," recalls the wife of analcoholic.
4. Depression
When we see our bargain has not worked, when we finally become exhausted from our struggle to ward off reality, and
when we decide to acknowledge what life has socked to us we become sad, sometimes terribly depressed. This is theessence of grief: mourning at its fullest. This is what we have been attempting at all costs to avoid. This is the time tocry, and it hurts. This stage of the process begins when we humbly surrender, says Esther Olson, a family counselor whoworks with the grief or, as she calls it, "forgiveness process." It will disappear, she says, only when the process has beenworked out and through.
5. Acceptance
This is it. After we have closed our eyes, kicked, screamed, negotiated, and finally felt the pain, we arrive at a state of
acceptance.
"It is not a resigned and hopeless 'giving up,' a sense of 'what's the use?' or 'I just cannot fight it any longer,' though we
hear such statements too," wrote Elisabeth Kübler-Ross. "They also indicate the beginning of the end of the struggle, butthe latter are not indications of acceptance. Acceptance should not be mistaken for a happy stage. It is almost void offeelings. It is as if the pain had gone, the struggle is over. . . ." 11
We are at peace with what is. We are free to stay; free to go on; free to make whatever decisions we need to make. We
are free! We have accepted our loss, however minor or significant. It has become an acceptable part of our presentcircumstances. We are comfortable with it and our lives. We have adjusted and reorganized. Once more, we arecomfortable with our present circumstances and ourselves.
 
page_137
Page 138
Not only are we comfortable with our circumstances and the changes we have endured, but we believe we have in some
way benefitted from our loss or change even if we cannot fully understand how or why. We have faith that all is well,and we have grown from our experience. We deeply believe our present circumstancesevery detail of themare exactly asthey ought to be for the moment. In spite of our fears, feelings, struggles, and confusion, we understand everything isokay even if we lack insight. We accept what is. We settle down. We stop running, ducking, controlling, and hiding. Andwe know it is only from this point that we can go forward.
This is how people accept things. Besides being called the grief process, counselor Esther Olson calls it the forgiveness
process, the healing process, and the "way God works with us." It is not particularly comfortable. In fact, it is awkwardand sometimes painful. We may feel like we're falling apart. When the process begins, we usually feel shock and panic.As we go through the stages, we often feel confused, vulnerable, lonely, and isolated. A sense of loss of control is usuallypresent, as is hope, which is sometimes unrealistic.
We will probably go through this process for anything that is a fact in our lives that we have not accepted. A codependent
person or a chemically dependent person may be in many stages of the grief process for several losses, all during the
same time. Denial, depression, bargaining, and anger may all come rushing in. We may not know what we're trying to
accept. We may not even know we're struggling to accept a situation. We may simply feel like we've gone crazy.
We haven't. Become familiar with this process. The entire process may take place in thirty seconds for a minor loss; it
may last years or a lifetime when the loss is significant. Because this is a model, we may not go through the stagesexactly as I have outlined them. We may travel back and forth: from anger to denial, from denial to bargaining, frombargaining back to denial. Regardless of the speed and route we travel through these stages, we must travel through them.Elisabeth Kübler-Ross says it is not only a normal process, it is a necessary process, and each stage is necessary. Wemust ward off the blows of life with denial until we are
 
page_138
Page 139
better prepared to deal with them. We must feel anger and blame until we have gotten them out of our system. We must
try to negotiate, and we must cry. We don't necessarily have to let the stages dictate our behaviors, but each of us, forour well-being and ultimate acceptance, needs to spend individually appropriate time in each stage. Judi Hollis quotedFritz Perls, the father of Gestalt therapy, in this manner: "The only way out is through." 12
We are sturdy beings. But in many ways, we are fragile. We can accept change and loss, but this comes at our own pace
and in our own way. And only we and God can determine that timing.
"Healthy are those who mourn," writes Donald L. Anderson, a minister and psychologist, in Better Than Blessed. "Only
very recently have we begun to realize that to deny grief is to deny a natural human function and that such denialsometimes produces dire consequences," he continues. "Grief, like any genuine emotion, is accompanied by certainphysical changes and the release of a form of psychic energy. If that energy is not expended in the normal process ofgrieving, it becomes destructive within the person. . . . Even physical illness can be a penalty for unresolved grief. . . .Any event, any awareness that contains a sense of loss for you can, and should, be mourned. This doesn't mean a life ofincessant sadness. It means being willing to admit to an honest feeling rather than always having to laugh off the pain. It'snot only permissible to admit the sadness that accompanies any lossit's the healthy option." 13
We can give ourselves permission to go through this process when we face loss and change, even minor losses andchanges. Be gentle with ourselves. This is a draining, exhausting process. It can deplete our energy and throw us offbalance. Watch how we pass through the stages and feel what we need to feel. Talk to people, people who are safe andwill provide the comfort, support, and understanding we need. Talk it out; talk it through. One thing that helps me isthanking God for the lossfor my present circumstancesregardless of how I feel or what I think about them. Another thingthat helps many people is the Serenity Prayer. We don't have to act or behave inappropriately, but we need to go throughthis. Other people do too. Understanding this process helps
 
page_139
Page 140
us be more supportive to other people, and it gives us the power to decide how we will behave and what to do to take
care of ourselves when we go through it.
Learn the art of acceptance. It's a lot of grief.
Activity
1. Are you or is someone in your life going through this grief process for a major loss? Which stage do you think you or
that person is in?
2. Review your life and consider the major losses and changes you have gone through. Recall your experiences with the
grief process. Write about your feelings as you remember them.
 
page_140
Page 141
13
Feel Your Own Feelings
When I repress my emotions, my stomach keeps score . . . 1John Powell
''I used to facilitate groups to help people deal with their feelings,'' says the wife of an alcoholic. "I used to openly
express my emotions. Now, after eight years in this relationship, I couldn't tell you what I was feeling if my lifedepended on it."
As codependents, we frequently lose touch with the emotional part of ourselves. Sometimes we withdraw emotionally to
avoid being crushed. Being emotionally vulnerable is dangerous. Hurt becomes piled upon hurt, and no one seems tocare. It becomes safer to go away. We become overloaded with pain, so we short-circuit to protect ourselves.
We may withdraw emotionally from certain peoplepeople we think may hurt us. We don't trust them, so we hide the
emotional part of us when we are around them.
Sometimes we feel forced to withdraw our emotions. Family systems, suffering from the effects of alcoholism and other
disorders, reject emotional honesty and at times appear to demand dishonesty. Consider our attempts to tell a drunk howwe felt about him or her smashing up the car, ruining the birthday party, or throwing up in our bed. Our feelings may
provoke unpleasant reactions in others, such as anger. Expressing our feelings may even be dangerous to our physicalwell-being, because they rock the family boat.
 
page_141
Page 142
Even families that have no history of alcoholism reject feelings. "Don't feel that way. That feeling is inappropriate. In
fact, don't even feel," may be the message we hear. We quickly learn the lie that our feelings don't count, that our feelingsare somehow wrong. Our feelings are not listened to, so we quit listening to them too.
It may appear easier, at times, to not feel. We have so much responsibility because we have taken on so much
responsibility for the people around us. We must do what is necessary anyway. Why take the time to feel? What would itchange?
Sometimes we try to make our feelings disappear because we are afraid of them. To acknowledge how we really feel
would demand a decisionaction or changeon our part. 2 It would bring us face to face with reality. We would becomeaware of what we're thinking, what we want, and what we need to do. And we're not ready to do that yet.
Codependents are oppressed, depressed, and repressed. Many of us can quickly tell what someone else is feeling, why
that person is feeling that way, how long they've felt that way, and what that person is probably going to do because ofthat feeling. Many of us spend our lives fussing about other people's feelings. We try to fix people's feelings. We try tocontrol other people's feelings. We don't want to hurt people, we don't want to upset them, and we don't want to offendthem. We feel so responsible for other people's feelings. Yet, we don't know what we are feeling. If we do, we don'tknow what to do to fix ourselves. Many of us have abandoned or never taken responsibility for our emotional selves.
Just how important are feelings, anyway? Before I answer that question, let me tell you about when I was in treatment for
chemical dependency at Willmar State Hospital, Willmar, Minnesota, in 1973. I was faced with kicking a ten-year habitof alcohol, heroin, dilaudid, morphine, methadone, cocaine, barbiturate, amphetamine, marijuana, and any othersubstance that even remotely promised to change the way I felt. When I asked my counselor, Ruth Anderson, and othercounselors how to do this, they replied: "Deal with your feelings." (They also suggested I attend Alcoholics Anonymous.More on that later.) I did start dealing with my feelings. It felt terrible at first. I had emotional explosions that I
 
page_142
Page 143
thought would rip the top of my head off. But it worked. I experienced my first days and months of sobriety. Then, it
came time to leave treatment. I was faced with the unlikely prospect of trying to fit myself into society. I had no resume;it can be difficult for a heroin addict to find and maintain gainful employment. I had to discontinue my relationships witheveryone I knew who used chemicals, which was everyone I knew. My family was skeptical about my recovery and stillunderstandably peeved about some of the things I had done. Generally, I had left a trail of destruction and chaos behindme, and I didn't think there was any place in society for me. My life stretched ahead of me, and it held little promise. Atthe same time, my counselor was telling me to go ahead and start living. Again, I asked her exactly how I should do that.Again, she and others replied: "Keep dealing with your feelings. Go to A.A. And everything will be okay."
It sounded a bit simplistic to me, but I didn't have much choice. Amazingly, and thanks to the help of a Higher Power,
it's worked so far. I got into deep water with my codependency when I thought myself too sophisticated to deal withfeelings. The moral of this story is that dealing with feelings and going to A.A. can help us recover from chemicaldependency. But it goes beyond that, and it answers the question I asked earlier, "How important are feelings?"
Feelings are not the end all and be all to living. Feelings must not dictate or control our behaviors, but we can't ignore
our feelings either. They won't be ignored.
Our feelings are very important. They count. They matter. The emotional part of us is special. If we make feelings go
away, if we push them away, we lose an important part of us and our lives. Feelings are our source of joy, as well assadness, fear, and anger. The emotional part of us is the part that laughs as well as cries. The emotional part of us is thecenter for giving and receiving the warm glow of love. That part of us lets us feel close to people. That part of us lets usenjoy touch and other sensual feelings.
Our feelings are also indicators. When we feel happy, comfortable, warm, and content, we usually know all is well in our
world, for the
 
page_143
Page 144
present moment. When we feel uncomfortable with anger, fear, or sadness, our feelings are telling us there's a problem.
The problem may be inside ussomething we're doing or thinkingor it may be external. But something is going wrong.
Feelings can be positive motivators too. Anger can motivate us to solve a bothersome problem. Fear encourages us to run
from danger. Repeated hurt and emotional pain tell us to stay away.
Our feelings can also provide us with clues to ourselves: our desires, wants, and ambitions. They help us discover
ourselves, what we are really thinking. Our emotions also tap into that deep part of us that seeks and knows truth, anddesires self-preservation, self-enhancement, safety, and goodness. Our emotions are connected to our conscious,cognitive thought process and to that mysterious gift called instinct or intuition.
There is, however, a darker side to emotions. Emotional pain hurts. It can hurt so badly we think all we are or ever will
be is our emotional part. Pain and sadness can linger. Fear can be a stopper; it can prevent us from doing the things wewant and need to do to live our lives.
Sometimes we can get stuck in emotionstrapped in a well of a certain dark feelingand think we'll never get out. Anger
can fester into resentments and bitterness and threaten to linger indefinitely. Sadness can turn into depression, almostsmothering us. Some of us live with fear for long periods of time.
Our feelings can trick us too. Our emotions can lead us into situations where our heads tell us not to go. Sometimes
feelings are like cotton candy; they appear to be more than they actually are.
In spite of the darker side of emotionsthe painful ones, the ones that linger, and the tricky onesthere is an even bleaker
picture if we choose to become unemotional. Not feeling our feelings, withdrawing emotionally, and pushing that part ofus away can be unpleasant, unhealthy, and self-destructive.
Repressing or denying feelings can lead to headaches, stomach disorders, backaches, and generally weakened physical
conditions which can open the door to many illnesses. Repressing feelings-particularly if we are doing it during the
denial stage of the grief processcan lead us
 
page_144
Page 145
into trouble with overeating, undereating, alcohol and other drug use, compulsive sexual behaviors, compulsive spending,
not sleeping enough, sleeping too much, obsessing, controlling gestures, and other compulsive behaviors. 3
Feelings are energy. Repressed feelings block our energy. We don't do our best when we're blocked.Another problem with repressed feelings is they don't go away. They linger, sometimes growing stronger and causing us
to do many peculiar things. We have to stay one step ahead of the feeling, we have to stay busy, we have to dosomething. We don't dare get quiet and peaceful because we might then feel these emotions. And the feeling mightsqueak out anyway, causing us to do something we never intended to do: scream at the kids, kick the cat, spill on ourfavorite dress, or cry at the party. We get stuck in feelings because we're trying to repress them, and like a persistentneighbor, they will not go away until we acknowledge their presence.
The big reason for not repressing feelings is that emotional withdrawal causes us to lose our positive feelings. We lose the
ability to feel. Sometimes, this may be a welcome relief if the pain becomes too great or too constant, but this is not agood plan for living. We may shut down our deep needsour need to love and be lovedwhen we shut down our emotions.We may lose our ability to enjoy sex, the human touch. We lose the ability to feel close to people, otherwise known asintimacy. We lose our capacity to enjoy the pleasant things in life.
We lose touch with ourselves and our environment. We are no longer in touch with our instincts. We become unaware of
what our feelings are telling us and any problems in our environment. We lose the motivating power of feelings. If wearen't feeling, we're probably not examining the thinking that goes with it, and we don't know what our selves are tellingus. And if we don't deal with our feelings we don't change and we don't grow. We stay stuck.
Feelings might not always be a barrel of gladness, but repressing them can be downright miserable. So what's the
solution? What do we do with these pesky feelings that seem to be both a burden and a delight?
 
page_145
Page 146
We feel them. We can feel. It's okay to feel our feelings. It's okay for us to have feelingsall of them. It's even okay for
men to feel. Feelings are not wrong. They're not inappropriate. We don't need to feel guilty about feelings. Feelings arenot acts; feeling homicidal rage is entirely different from committing homicide. Feelings shouldn't be judged as eithergood or bad. Feelings are emotional energy; they are not personality traits.
People say there are hundreds of different feelings, ranging from peeved to miffed to exuberant to delighted and so on.
Some therapists have cut the list to four: mad, sad, glad, and scared. These are the four primary feeling groups, and allthe rest are shades and variations. For instance, lonely and "down in the dumps" would fall in the sad category; anxietyand nervousness would be variations of the scared theme; tickled pink and happy would qualify as glad. You can callthem whatever you want; the important idea is to feel them.
That doesn't mean we have to always be on guard for one feeling or the other. It doesn't mean we have to devote an
extraordinary amount of our lives to wallowing in emotional muck. In fact, dealing with our feelings means we can moveout of the muck. It means if a feelingemotional energycomes our way, we feel it. We take a few moments, acknowledgethe sensation, and move on to the next step. We don't censor. We don't block. We don't run from. We don't tell ourselves,"Don't feel that. Something must be wrong with me." We don't pass judgment on ourselves for our feelings. Weexperience them. We allow the energy to pass through our bodies, and we accept it as being our emotional energy, ourfeeling. We say, "Okay."
Next, we do that mystical thing so many people refer to as "dealing with our feelings." We appropriately respond to our
emotion. We examine the thoughts that go with it, and we accept them without repression or censorship. 4
Then, we decide whether there is a next step. This is where we do our judging. This is where our moral code comes into
play. We still don't judge ourselves for having the feeling. We decide what, if anything, we want to do about the feeling
and the accompanying thought. We evaluate
 
page_146
Page 147
the situation, then choose a behavior in line with our moral code and our new ideal of self-care. Is there a problem we
need to solve? Is our thinking off base? We may need to correct certain disaster-oriented thought patterns, such as: "Ifeel horribly afraid and sad because the car broke down, and it's the end of the world." It would be more accurate to say:"I feel sad that the car is broken." Is the problem something we can solve? Does it concern another person? Is it necessaryor appropriate to discuss the feeling with that person? If so, when? Perhaps it is sufficient to merely feel the emotion andacknowledge the thought. If you are in doubt about what action to take, if the feeling is particularly strong, or if theaction you decide to take is radical, I suggest waiting a day or so, until you are peaceful and your mind is consistent. Inother words: detach.
Our feelings don't need to control us. Just because we're angry, we don't have to scream and hit. Just because we're sad or
depressed, we don't have to lie in bed all day. Just because we're scared, doesn't mean we don't apply for that job. I amnot in any way implying or suggesting we allow our emotions to control our behaviors. In fact, what I am saying is theopposite: if we don't feel our feelings and deal with them responsibly, they will control us. If we are dealing with ouremotions responsibly, we submit them to our intellect, our reason, and our moral and behavioral code of ethics. 5
Responding appropriately to our feelings also means we are liable for our feelings. Each person's feelings are his or her
own. Nobody makes anyone feel; no one is ultimately responsible for our feelings except us, no matter how much weinsist they are. People might help us feel, but they don't make us feel. People also cannot change the way we feel. Onlywe can do that. Furthermore, we are not responsible for anyone else's feelings, although we are responsible for choosingto be considerate of people's feelings. Responsible people choose to do that, at times. However, most codependentschoose to overdo that. We need to be considerate of our feelings, too. Our feelings are reactions to life's circumstances.Thus, etiquette requires that when you discuss a feeling with someone, you say, "I feel such and such when you do suchand such because . . . " not "You made me feel. . . ." 6
 
page_147
Page 148
However, we may want to make another decision about how to deal with our feelings. This is especially true if we areconsistently reacting to someone's behavior with a great deal of emotional distress, and even after reporting this distressto the person he or she continues causing us pain. Maybe you don't need that much help to feel. Remember, feelings areindicators and motivators. Watch for patterns in our feelings. They tell us a great deal about ourselves and ourrelationships.
Sometimes, dealing with feelings means a change of thinking is needed. Many therapies acknowledge a direct correlation
between what we think and what we feel. 7 There is a connection. What we think influences how we feel. Sometimesinaccurate, overreactive, or inappropriate thought patterns cause our emotions or cause them to remain longer thannecessary. If we think something is awful, will never get better, and just shouldn't be, our feelings will be intense. I callthis disaster thinking. That's why it is important, after we feel our emotions, to examine our thinking. Get it out in thelight. If it's inappropriate, then we know what we have to do to solve our problem, don't we?
There are times when we may need to discuss our feelings and thoughts with other people. It is not healthy to live our
lives in isolation. Sharing the emotional part of us with others creates closeness and intimacy. Also, being accepted bysomeone else for being who we are helps us accept ourselves. This is always a marvelous experience. Sometimes, wemay want to discuss things with a friend who will just listen, while we air things and try to figure out what's going on.Things we lock inside can get too big and too powerful. Letting them out in the air makes them smaller. We gainperspective. It's always fun to share the pleasant feelings too: the joys, the successes, the "tickled-pinks." And if we wantan intimate relationship with someone, we need to discuss our persistent feelings with him or her. It's called emotionalhonesty.
Caution: intense happy feelings can be as distracting and scary as intense sad feelings, especially to codependents who
are not used to happy feelings, according to Scott Egleston. Many codependents believe happy feelings must always be
followed by sad feelings, because that is the
 
page_148
Page 149
way it has usually happened in the past. Some codependents believe we can't, shouldn't, and don't deserve to feel happy.
Sometimes we do things to create sad feelings after experiencing happy feelings, or whenever the possibility of a happyfeeling exists. It's okay to feel happy. It's okay to feel sad. Let the emotional energy pass through, and strive for peaceand balance.
There are times when we may need professional help to deal with our emotions. If we are stuck in any particular feeling
we should give ourselves what we need. See a counselor, a therapist, a psychoanalyst, or a clergyperson. Take care ofourselves. We deserve it. We may also want to seek professional help if we've been repressing feelings for a long periodof time or if we suspect what we've been repressing is intense.
Sometimes, it just takes only a little practice and awareness to awaken the emotional part of us. The following things
help me get in touch with my feelings: physical exercise, writing letters I don't intend to send, talking to people I feelsafe with, and spending quiet time in meditation. We need to make awareness of ourselves a habit. We need to payattention to the "shouldn't feel that way" attitudes we tell ourselves; we need to pay attention to our level ofcomfortableness; we need to listen to what we're thinking and saying and the tone of voice we use; we need to keep aneye on what we're doing. We will find our way to and through our emotions, a way that works for us.
We need to invite emotions into our lives. Then make a commitment to take gentle, loving care of them. Feel our
feelings. Trust our feelings and trust ourselves. We are wiser than we think.
Activity
1. Read through your journal writings. What emotions were squeaking or pouring out as you wrote?
2. Let's play a "what if" game. What if you could be feeling anything you wanted right now, and feeling that way
wouldn't make you a bad person. What would you be feeling? Write about it.
 
page_149
Page 150
3. Find someone who is safe, a good listener, accepting, and nonrescuing, and begin honestly and openly discussing yourfeelings with that person. Listen to that person's feelings without judgment or caretaking gestures. This is nice, isn't it? Ifyou don't know anybody you feel safe doing that with, join a support group.
 
page_150
Page 151
14Anger
''What is it about me that you hate so much?'' a man asked his wife six months into his sobriety."Everything!" she replied with a glare. Anonymous quote
For many years I rarely felt anger. I cried. I felt hurt. But anger? No, not me.After I began my recovery from codependency, I wondered if I would ever not be angry.Janet Woititz described me in this quote from Marriage on the Rocks: "You become rigid and mistrustful. Rage
consumes you without a satisfying outlet. Anyone who walks into your house can feel the angry vibrations. There is no
escape from it. Whoever thought you would turn into such a self-righteous witch?" 1
Angry feelings are a part of almost everyone's life. Children feel anger; teenagers feel anger; adults feel anger.
Sometimes, anger plays a small part in our lives and presents no particular problem. We blow off steam, and we're donewith it. We go on with the business of living, and the problem is resolved.
That is usually not the case with codependents, particularly if we are involved with an alcoholic, an addict, or someone
with a serious ongoing problem. Anger can become a large part of our lives. It can become our lives. The alcoholic ismad, we're mad, the kids are mad, and so is the dog. Everyone is mad, all the time. Nobody ever seems to blow offenough
 
page_151
Page 152
steam. Even if we aren't shouting, even if we're trying to pretend we're not angry, we're mad. We give looks and make
little gestures that give us away. Hostility lurks just below the surface, waiting for a chance to come out in the open. Theanger sometimes explodes like a bomb, but nobody ever gets done with it. The alcoholic says, "How dare you becomeangry with me? I'm the king. I'll get angry with you, but not the other way around." The codependent says, "After all I'vedone for you, I'll get angry any time I please." But silently, the codependent wonders: Maybe he or she is right. . . . Howdare we get angry with the alcoholic? There must be something wrong with us for feeling this way. We deal anotherblow to our self-worth with a little guilt tacked on. Plus, the anger is still there. The problems don't get resolved; theanger doesn't blow over. It festers and boils.
Even with the gift of sobriety or recovery from any ongoing problem, the anger may and usually does linger. 2 Usually,
it has reached a peak by the time the alcoholic gets help. Nobody, including the alcoholic, can stand the insanity anylonger. Sometimes it gets worse. The codependent may learn for the first time that it isn't the codependent's fault. Thecodependent may even feel new anger for having believed for so long it was! It may be safe for the first time for thecodependent to feel and express anger. Things may finally have calmed down enough for the codependent to realize howangry he or she was and is. This can cause more conflicts. The alcoholic may expect and want to start freshminus thedirty laundry from the pastnow that he or she has begun a new life.
So the alcoholic says, "How dare you get angry now? We're starting over."And the codependent replies, "That's what you think. I'm just getting started."Then the codependent may add to his or her low self-worth and guilt another silent, torturing thought: "The alcoholic is
right. How dare I be angry now? I should be ecstatic. I should be grateful. There's something wrong with me."
Then everyone feels guilty, because everyone feels angry. And everyone feels angrier because they feel guilty. They feel
cheated and mad
 
page_152
Page 153
because sobriety did not bring the joy it had promised. It was not the turning point for living happily ever after. Don't
misunderstand. It's better. It's a lot better when people become sober. But sobriety is not a magical cure for anger andrelationship problems. The old anger burns away. New anger fuels the fire. The chemical or problem can no longer beblamed, although it frequently still is. The chemicals can no longer be used to medicate the angry feelings. Often,codependents can no longer even get the sympathy and nurturing we need from friends. We think it's wonderful that thealcoholic has quit drinking or the problem has been solved. What's wrong with us? we ask. Can't we forgive and forget?And once more the codependent wonders, What is wrong with me?
Anger may be a commonplace emotion, but it is tough to deal with. Most of us haven't been taught how to deal with
anger, because people show us how they deal with anger; they don't teach us. And most people show us inappropriateways to deal with anger because they're not sure either.
People may give us good advice. "Be angry, but do not sin; do not let the sun go down on your anger." 3 "Don't seek
revenge." Many of us can't adhere to these mandates. Some of us think they mean: "Don't be angry." Many of us aren't
sure what we believe about anger. Some of us believe lies about anger.
Frequently, codependents and other people believe the following myths about anger:
· It's not okay to feel angry.
· Anger is a waste of time and energy.
· Good, nice people don't feel angry.
· We shouldn't feel angry when we do.
· We'll lose control and go crazy if we get angry.
· People will go away if we get angry with them.
· Other people should never feel anger toward us.
· If others get angry with us, we must have done something wrong.
· If other people are angry with us, we made them feel that way and we're responsible for fixing their feelings.
 
page_153
Page 154
· If we feel angry, someone else made us feel that way and that person is responsible for fixing our feelings.
· If we feel angry with someone, the relationship is over and that person has to go away.
· If we feel angry with someone, we should punish that person for making us feel angry.
· If we feel angry with someone, that person has to change what he or she is doing so we don't feel angry any more.
· If we feel angry, we have to hit someone or break something.
· If we feel angry, we have to shout and holler.
· If we feel angry with someone, it means we don't love that person any more.
· If someone feels angry with us, it means that person doesn't love us any more.
· Anger is a sinful emotion.
· It's okay to feel angry only when we can justify  our feelings. 4
Many people in programs such as Alcoholics Anonymous believe they should never feel angry in their recovery. The
idea intended by recovery programs is that people learn to deal appropriately and immediately with anger, before it buildsinto harmful resentments.
As codependents, we may be frightened of our anger and other people's anger. Maybe we believe one or more of the
myths. Or maybe we're frightened of anger for other reasons. Someone may have hit or abused us when he or she wasangry. Some of us may have hit or abused someone else when we felt angry. Sometimes just the raw level of energy thataccompanies someone's anger can be frightening, particularly if that person is drunk.
We react to anger, both ours and other people's. It is a provocative emotion. It can be contagious. And many of us have
so much of it to react to. We have so much of the anger that accompanies grief. We have the anger that comes from thepersecution stage of rescuing or caretaking. Many of us are stuck on that corner of the triangle. We have unreasonableanger feelings that may be unjustified and caused by reactive, disastrous
 
page_154
Page 155
thinking: the shoulds, awfuls, nevers, and always. We have justified angerall the mad feelings anyone would feel if
someone did that to him or her. We have the anger that covers up hurt and fear. Sad and scared feelings convert intoanger, and many of us have so much hurt and fear. We have anger that comes from feeling guilty. Guilt, both earned andunearned, easily converts into anger. 5 Codependents have a lot of that too. Believe it or not, so do alcoholics. They'rejust more adept at converting it into anger.
And we have reactive anger. We get angry because the other person feels angry. Then they get angrier, and we get
angrier because they got angrier. Soon everybody's angry, and no one is sure why. But we're all madand feeling guiltyabout it.
Sometimes, we prefer to stay angry. It helps us feel less vulnerable and more powerful. It's like a protective shield. If
we're angry, we won't feel hurt or scared, at least not noticeably so.
Sadly, many of us have had no place to go with all that anger. We swallow it, bite our tongues, stiffen our shoulders,
push it into our stomachs, let it rattle around in our heads, run from it, medicate it, or give it a cookie. We blameourselves, turn anger into depression, put ourselves to bed, hope to die, and get sick because of it. Finally we ask God toforgive us for being such horrible people for feeling anger in the first place.
Many of us have been in a real dilemma with our anger, especially if we are living in a family system that says, "Don't
feel; especially don't feel angry." The alcoholic certainly doesn't want to hear about how mad we feel. He or she probablythinks our anger is unreasonable anyway, and it may bother him or her when we discuss it. Our anger may push thealcoholic's guilt buttons. The alcoholic may even overpower us with his or her anger just to keep us guilty and repressed.
Frequently we can't or don't want to tell our parents how we feel. They may be mad at us for having a friendship with
someone who has an alcohol or other drug problem. Or our parents may only see the good side of the alcoholic or addictand think we're unreasonable and unappreciative. Our friends may even become sick of hearing us complain.
 
page_155
Page 156
Some of us may feel so ashamed that we believe we can't tell our pastor or priest how angry we are. The clergy would
just call us sinners, and we don't need to hear any more of that. That's all we've been telling ourselves. Many of uswouldn't think of turning to our Higher Power and expressing how angry we are.
So what do we do with all this built-up steam? The same thing we do with almost everything that has to do with us: we
repress it and feel guilty about it. Repressed anger, like other repressed emotions, causes problems. Sometimes our angermay leak out inappropriately. We scream at someone we didn't intend to scream at. We wrinkle up our faces, curl ourlips, and help people feel like they don't want to be around us. We slam dishes around even though we can't afford tobreak anything of material value because we've already lost so much.
Other times our anger may show its face in different ways. We may find ourselves not wanting, unable, or refusing to
enjoy sex. 6 We may find ourselves unable to enjoy anything. Then we add more self-hatred to our already heaping pileby wondering what is wrong with us and going on our hostile way. When people ask us what's wrong, we tighten our jawand say, "Nothing. I feel just fine, thank you." We may even start doing little sneaky mean things or big sneaky meanthings to get even with those we're angry at.
If anger is repressed long enough, it will ultimately do more than leak out. Unpleasant feelings are like weeds. They don't
go away when we ignore them; they grow wild and take over. Our angry feelings may one day come roaring out. We saythings we don't mean. Or, as usually happens, we may say what we really mean. We may lose control and unleashourselves in a fighting, spitting, screeching, hair-pulling, dish-breaking rage. Or we may do something to hurt ourselves.Or the anger may harden into bitterness, hatred, contempt, revulsion, or resentment.
And we still wonder, "What's wrong with me?"We can repeat it to ourselves as often as necessary: There's nothing wrong with us. Like the book title says, Of Course
You're Angry! 7 Of course we're that angry. We're that steamed because anybody in his or
 
page_156
Page 157
her right mind would be that steamed. An excellent quote from Marriage on the Rocks follows:
"You cannot live with active alcoholism without being profoundly affected. Any human being who is bombarded with
what you've been bombarded with is to be commended for sheer survival. You deserve a medal for the mere fact thatyou're around to tell the story." 8
Anger is one profound effect of alcoholism. It is also an effect of many of the other compulsive disorders or problems
codependents find themselves living with.
Even if we're not living with a serious problem or seriously ill person, it is still okay to feel anger when it occurs. Anger
is one of the many profound effects life has on us. It's one of our emotions. And we're going to feel it when it comes ourwayor else repress it. "I don't trust people who never get mad. People either get mad, or get even," says my friend SharonGeorge, who is a professional in the mental health field.
We have every right to feel anger. We have every right to feel as angry as we feel. So do other people. But we also have
a responsibilityprimarily to ourselvesto deal with our anger appropriately.
We're back to our original advice: Deal with our feelings. How do we deal with an emotion as potent as anger? How do
we quit feeling that angry? When does it happen? Where does it go? Who can we talk to? Who would want to listen toall that? We probably don't even want to hear it ourselves. After all, the person we're mad at does have a disease. Soshouldn't we be feeling compassion and all that good stuff? Is it really all right to be this mad at a sick person?
Yes, we have the right to be mad at a sick person. We didn't ask for the problem. Although the ideal feeling is
compassion, we probably won't feel this until we deal with our anger. Somewhere between homicidal rage and biting ourtongue because we feel sorry for that sick person is a way to get past our angry feelingsthe old ones and the new ones.But I don't believe dealing with repressed emotions will happen overnight. It may not happen in a month or even a year.How long did it take us to get this angry? Dealing with a significant amount of repressed anger may take time and effort.Dealing with new anger takes practice.
 
page_157
Page 158
Here are some suggestions for dealing with anger:
·
 Address any myths we have subscribed to about anger. Give ourselves permission to feel angry when we need to. Give
other people permission to feel angry too.
· Feel the emotion. Even though it's anger, it's only emotional energy. It is not right or wrong; it calls for no judgment.
Anger doesn't have to be justified or rationalized. If the energy is there, feel it. Feel any underlying emotions too, such as
hurt or fear.
· Acknowledge the thoughts that accompany the feeling. Preferably, say these thoughts aloud.
· Examine the thinking that goes with the feeling. Hold it up to the light. See if there are any flaws in it. Watch for
patterns and repetitive situations. We'll learn much about ourselves and our environment. Often, recovering alcoholics
develop rancid thought patterns, known as stinking thinking, that can indicate the desire to start drinking again.
· Make a responsible decision about what, if any, action we need to take. Figure out what our anger is telling us. Is our
anger indicating a problem in us or in our environment that needs attention? Sometimes while we're asking God to help
us stop feeling angry, He's trying to tell us something. Do we need change? Do we need something from somebody else?Much anger comes from unmet needs. One quick way to resolve anger is to stop screaming at the person we're angrywith, figure out what we need from that person, and ask him or her for that. If he or she won't or can't give it to us,figure out what we need to do next to take care of ourselves.
· Don't let anger control us. If we find ourselves being controlled by our angry feelings, we can stop ourselves. We don't
have to continue screaming. Don't misinterpret; sometimes screaming helps. Sometimes, however, it doesn't. It's better if
we decide, instead of letting our anger decide for us. We don't have to lose control of our actions. It's just energy, not amagical curse over us. Detach. Go to another room. Go to another house. Get peaceful. Then figure out what we need todo. We don't have to let other people's anger control us. I frequently hear codependents say, "I can't do this or thatbecause he
 
page_158
Page 159
(or she) will get angry." Don't jeopardize our safety, but strive to be free from anger's controlour anger or anyoneelse's. We don't have to react to anger. It's only emotional energy. We don't even have to react by becoming angry, ifwe don't want to. Try it sometime.
·
 Openly and honestly discuss our anger, when it's appropriate. But don't talk to a drunk when he's drunk. We can make
good decisions about expressing our anger openly and appropriately. Beware of how we approach people, though. Angerfrequently begets anger. Instead of venting our rage on the person, we can feel our feelings, think our thoughts, figure outwhat we need from that person, and then go back to him or her and express that need, instead of hollering.
·
 Take responsibility for our anger. We can say: "I feel angry when you do this because . . ." not, "You made me mad."
However, I like to give people a little room in communication. We don't always have to say the words exactly right, as if
we just walked out of a therapy group. Be ourselves. Just understand we are responsible for our angry feelingseven ifthey are an appropriate reaction to someone else's inappropriate behavior.
·
 Talk to people we trust. Talking about anger and being listened to and accepted really help clear the air. It helps us
accept ourselves. Remember, we can't move forward until we accept where we are. And yes, people care. We may have
to leave our house to find them, or go to Al-Anon meetings, but they are out there. If we have angry feelings that havehardened into resentments, we can talk them out with a clergyperson or take a Fourth and Fifth Step. Resentments maybe hurting us a lot more than they're helping us.
·
 Burn off the anger energy. Clean the kitchen. Play softball. Exercise. Go dancing. Shovel the snow. Rake the yard.
Build a condominium if necessary. Anger is extremely stressful, and it helps to physically discharge that energy.·
 Don't beat ourselves or others for feeling angry. Don't let other people hit us or abuse us in any way when they feel
angry. Don't hurt other people when we're angry. Seek professional help if abuse has occurred.·
 Write letters we don't intend to send. If we feel guilty about anger, this really helps. Start the letter by asking: "If I could
feel angry about
 
page_159
Page 160
anything, nobody would ever know, and it wasn't wrong to feel this way, what I would be angry about is this . . . "
Once our anger is out on paper we can get past the guilt and figure out how to deal with it. If we are suffering fromdepression, this exercise may help too.
·
 Deal with guilt. Get rid of the unearned guilt. Get rid of all of it. Guilt doesn't help. God will forgive us for anything we
have done. Besides, I bet He doesn't think we've done as much wrong as we think we have.
Once we begin dealing with anger, we may notice we feel angry much of the time. That's common. We're like kids with anew toy. We'll settle down with it. Be patient. We aren't going to deal with it perfectly. No one does. We'll makemistakes, but we'll also learn from them. The reason we're told to not seek revenge is because getting even is a commonresponse to anger. If we've done or do some inappropriate things, deal with earned guilt and go on from there. Strive forprogress.
We need to be gentle with ourselves if we've been repressing loads of angry feelings. Things take time. We may need to
be that angry for now. When we don't need to be angry any more, well quit feeling angry if we want to. If we think we
might be stuck in anger, get professional help.
Some people believe we never have to become angry; if we control our thinking and are appropriately detached, we will
never react with or wallow around in anger. That's probably true; however, I prefer to relax and see what happens, ratherthan guard myself rigidly. And like my friend, I'm leery of people who smile and tell me they never get mad. Don'tmisunderstandI'm not advising us to hang onto anger or resentments. I don't believe anger should become our focus inlife, nor should we look for reasons to become angry to test ourselves. "It's not good to be angry all the time," sayscounselor Esther Olson. It's not healthy to act hostile. There is much more to life than anger.
But it's okay to feel anger when we need to.
 
page_160
Page 161
Activity
1. What do you think would happen if you started feeling your angry feelings?
2. What do you believe deep inside about anger? What myths about anger have you subscribed to? If you need to
subscribe to new beliefs about anger, do so. Attack the myths whenever they try to attack you.
3. How do the people in your current family situation deal with anger? How did your mother, father, brothers, and sisters
deal with their anger? What's your pattern for dealing with anger?
4. If you have repressed anger, write about it in your notebook. You may need to buy a new notebook and devote it to
anger.
5. If anger is a troublesome emotion for you, keep a pencil and paper handy and start writing about your anger as it
occurs throughout the day.
 
page_161
Page 163
15Yes, You Can Think
For God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind. 111 Timothy 1:7
''What do you  think I should do?'' a client, who was in the throes of her codependency, once asked me. The woman was
facing a significant decision regarding her husband and children."What do you  think?" I asked.
"You're asking me ?" she asked. "It takes me fifteen minutes at the grocery store to decide if I want to buy the 59-cent or
the 63-cent bottle of bleach. I can't make the tiniest decisions. How do you expect me to make a big, important one like
this?"
As codependents, many of us don't trust our minds. We truly understand the horror of indecision. The smallest choices,
such as what to order at the restaurant or which bottle of bleach to purchase, paralyze us. The larger significant decisionswe face, such as how to solve our problems, what to do with our lives, and who to live with, can overwhelm us. Many ofus simply give up and refuse to think about these things. Some of us allow other people or circumstances to make thesechoices for us.
This is a short chapter, but it's an important one. Throughout the book, I have been encouraging you to think about
things, figure things out, decide what you need, decide what you want, and decide how to solve your problems. Some of
you may be wondering if that's possible.
 
page_163
Page 164
The purpose of this chapter is to tell you that you can think, you can figure things out, and you can make decisionsgood,
healthy decisions.
For a variety of reasons, we may have lost faith in our ability to think and reason things out. Believing lies, lying to
ourselves (denial), chaos, stress, low self-esteem, and a stomach full of repressed emotions may cloud our ability tothink. We become confused. That doesn't mean we can't think.
Overreacting may impair our mental functioning. Decisiveness is hindered by worrying about what other people think,
telling ourselves we have to be perfect, and telling ourselves to hurry. We falsely believe we can't make the "wrong"choice, we'll never have another chance, and the whole world waits and rises on this particular decision. We don't haveto do these things to ourselves.
Hating ourselves, telling ourselves we won't make good decisions, and then throwing in a batch of "shoulds" every time
we try to make decisions, doesn't help our thinking process, either.
Not listening to our needs and wants, and telling ourselves that what we desire is wrong, cheats us out of the information
we need to make good choices. Second-guessing and "what ifs" don't help either. We're learning to love, trust, and listento ourselves.
Maybe we've been using our minds inappropriately, to worry and obsess, and our minds are tired, abused, and filled with
anxious thoughts. We're learning to stop these patterns also.
Perhaps we lost faith in our ability to think because people have told us we can't think and make good decisions. Our
parents may have directly or indirectly done this when we were children. They may have told us we were stupid. Or theymay have made all our decisions for us. Maybe they criticized all our choices. Or they could have confused us bydenying or by refusing to acknowledge our ability to think when we pointed out problems in the home.
Maybe we had difficulties with subjects in school when we were young; instead of doing what we needed to do to solve
the problem, we gave up and told ourselves we couldn't think and figure things out.
 
page_164
Page 165
People may have put down the intelligence of women, but that's nonsense. Were not stupid. Women can think. Men can
think. Children can think.
We may be living with people now who are telling us directly or indirectly that we can't think. Some of them may even
be telling us we're crazy, but alcoholics do that to people they live with. Maybe we've started wondering if we are crazy!But don't believe any of it for one moment.
We can think. Our minds work well. We can figure things out. We can make decisions. We can figure out what we want
and need to do and when it is time to do that. And we can make choices that enhance our self-esteem.
We're even entitled to opinions! And yes, we do have some of those. We can think appropriately and rationally. We even
have the power to evaluate ourselves and our thoughts, so we can correct our thinking when it becomes disastrous orirrational.
We can evaluate our behavior. We can make decisions about what we need and want. We can figure out what our
problems are and what we need to do to solve them. We can make little decisions and big decisions. We may feelfrustrated when we try to make decisions or solve problems, but that's normal. Sometimes we need to become frustratedto make a breakthrough in our thinking. It's all part of the process.
Remember, decisions don't have to be made perfectly. We don't have to be perfect. We don't even have to be nearly
perfect. We can just be who we are. We can make mistakes in our choices. We're not so fragile we can't handle making a
mistake. It's no big deal! It's part of living. We can learn from our mistakes, or we can simply make another decision. The
following quotation discusses decisiveness in the corporate world, but I believe it applies to other areas of life too.
"If you make a decision, you'll become a hero within the corporate culture. If 30 percent of your decisions are right,
you're going to be a big hitter." 2
We can even change our minds. Then change them again. Then again. Codependents vacillate. 3 As codependents, we are
in the midst of
 
page_165
Page 166
upsetting situations. We may go back and forth a lot; we may throw the alcoholic out, then take him or her back. We
may leave, then come back, then leave again. This is how we get to where we're going. It's okay. Let's take it one stepfurtherit's normal and often necessary.
"But," a codependent may object, "you don't know my mind. Sometimes I think terrible thoughts. Sometimes I have
unspeakable fantasies." We all do, and it's normal, especially if we're living with an alcoholic. We may have attended analcoholic spouse's funeral 100 times in our minds. Our thoughts are keys to our feelings. Our feelings are keys to ourthoughts. We don't have to repress. We need to let the thoughts and feelings pass through, then figure out what we needto do to take care of ourselves.
The following suggestions may help us gain confidence in our mental abilities:
·Treat our minds to some peace. Detach. Get calm. If we're facing a decision, big or small, get peaceful first, then
decide. Wait until our minds are consistent. If we absolutely can't make a decision on a particular day, then it's obviously
not time to make that decision. When it is time, we'll be able to do it. And do it well.
·Ask God to help us think. Every morning, I ask Him to give me the right thought, word, or action. I ask Him to send
His inspiration and guidance. I ask Him to help me solve my problems. 4 I believe He does help. I know He does. But
He expects me to do my part and think. Some days go better than others.
·Quit abusing our minds. Worry and obsession constitute mental abuse. Stop doing those things.
·Feed our minds. Give our minds information. Get the information we need about problems and decisions, whether that
problem is overeating, alcoholism, relationships, or how to buy a computer. Give our minds a reasonable amount of data,
then let them sort through things. We will come up with good answers and solutions.
·Feed our minds healthy thoughts. Indulge in activities that uplift our thoughts and give us a positive charge. Read a
meditation book every
 
page_166
Page 167
morning. Find something that leaves us saying "I can," instead of "I can't."
·Stretch our minds. Many of us become so concerned about our problems and other people's problems that we stop
reading newspapers, watching documentaries, reading books, and learning new things. Get interested in the world around
us. Learn something new. Take a class.
·Quit saying bad things about our minds. Stop telling ourselves things like, "I'm stupid," "I can't make good decisions,"
"I'm really not very smart,'' "I've never been good at figuring things out,'' or "I'm not very good at decisions." It's just as
easy to say good things about ourselves as it is to say negative things. And, we'll probably start believing the positivethings and find out they're true. Isn't that exciting?
·Use our minds. Make decisions. Formulate opinions. Express them. Create! Think things through, but don't worry and
obsess. We don't have to let anyone make our decisions for us, unless we're wards of the state. And even if we are, we
can still think and make some of our choices. Letting people make our decisions for us means we're getting rescued,
which means we're feeling like victims. We're not victims. Furthermore, it is not our business to make decisions for other
adults. We can take possession of our power to think. And we can let others be responsible for their thinking. We willgain more confidence in ourselves, as we start feeling better and begin to make decisions, small and large. The peoplearound us will grow, as they are allowed to make choices and mistakes.
We can become comfortable with our minds. Become acquainted with them. They're part of us, and they work. Trustthem and our ability to think.
 
page_167
Page 168
Activity
1. Who makes your decisions for you? How do you feel about that?2. Did someone important in your life tell you that you couldn't think and make good decisions? Who?
3. Begin doing one thing every day to improve your mind: read an article in the newspaper and formulate an opinion.
Later, you might really want to take a risk and tell somebody your opinion on that subject. You may even find yourself ina lively debate.
 
page_168
Page 169
16Set Your Own Goals
Believe that life is worth living and your belief will create the fact. Be not afraid to live. William James
The most exciting idea I have discovered in my sobriety and my recovery from codependency is the magic in setting
goals. Things happen. Things change. I accomplish important projects. I change. I meet new people. I find myself ininteresting places. I make it through difficult times with a minimum of chaos. Problems get solved. My needs and wantsget met. Dreams come true.
I am ecstatic about goal setting, and I hope I can transmit my enthusiasm to you. There is nothing in the world like going
where we want to go, getting what we want, solving a problem, or doing something we always wanted to do.
Many codependents don't know this joy. It is new to me too. I spent many years of my life not even bothering to think
about what I wanted and needed, where I wanted to go, and what I wanted to do. Life was to be endured. I didn't think Ideserved good things. I didn't think most good things were within my reach. I wasn't that interested in my life, except asan appendage to other people. I didn't think about living my life; I was too focused on others. I was too busy reacting,rather than acting.
I am not suggesting we can control all the events in our lives. We can't. We don't have final say on much of anything;
God does. But I
 
page_169
Page 170
believe we can cooperate with goodness. I believe we can plan, make requests, and start a process in motion.
"Desire, when harnessed, is power,"  writes David Schwartz in his best-seller, The Magic of Thinking Big. Failure to
follow desire, to do what you want to do most, paves the way to mediocrity. "Success requires heart and soul effort and
you can only put your heart and soul into something you really desire." 1
Goals also give us direction and purpose. I don't get into my car, turn on the ignition, start driving, and hope I get
someplace. I decide where I want to go or approximately where I would like to end up, then I steer the car in that generaldirection. That is how I try to live my life too. Sometimes things happen, and for a variety of reasons I may not end upwhere I wanted to go. If I change my mind or problems beyond my control interfere, I find myself doing something otherthan what I had planned to do. Timing and exact circumstances may vary. That's okay. I usually end up someplace betteror someplace that is better for me. That is where acceptance, trust, faith, and letting go come in. But at least I'm notdriving aimlessly through life. More of the things I want come to pass. I'm less worried about solving my problems,because I've turned my problems into goals. And I'm starting to think about and consider what I want and need.
Goals are fun. They generate interest and enthusiasm in life. They make life interesting and, sometimes, exciting.". . . Surrender to desire and gain energy, enthusiasm, mental zip, and even better health. . . . energy increases, multiplies,
when you set a desired goal and resolve to work toward that goal. Many people, millions of them, can find new energyby selecting a goal and giving all they've got to accomplish that goal. Goals cure boredom. Goals even cure many chronicailments." 2
There is magic in setting and writing down goals. It sets into motion a powerful psychological, spiritual, and emotionalforce. We become aware of and do the things we need to do to achieve and accomplish. Things come to us. Things beginto happen! Following is another excerpt from The Magic of Thinking Big.
 
page_170
Page 171
Let's probe a little deeper into the power of goals. When you surrender yourself to your desires, when you let
yourself become obsessed with a goal, you receive the physical power, energy, and enthusiasm needed toaccomplish your goal. But you receive something else, something equally valuable. You receive the "automaticinstrumentation" needed to keep you going straight to your objective.
The most amazing thing about a deeply entrenched goal is that it keeps you on course to reach your target. Thisisn't double-talk. What happens is this. When you surrender to your goal, the goal works itself into yoursubconscious mind. Your subconscious mind is always in balance. Your conscious mind is not, unless it is in tunewith what your subconscious mind is thinking. Without full cooperation from the subconscious mind, a person ishesitant, confused, indecisive. Now, with your goal absorbed into your subconscious mind you react the right wayautomatically. The conscious mind is free for clear, straight thinking. 3
What are our goals? What do we want to happen in our livesthis week, this month, this year, for the next five years?What problems do we want solved? What material things would we like to possess? What changes do we want to makein ourselves? What would we love to do for a career? What do we want to accomplish?
I'm not going to present a textbook lecture on exactly how you should set goals. Setting goals has been made too boring
for too long. Following are some ideas I believe are important. Find a way that works.
·Turn everything into a goal. If we have a problem make its solution our goal. We don't have to know the solution. Our
goal is solving this problem. Do we want something? A new waterbed, a red sweater, a new car, longer hair, longernails? Turn it into a goal. Do we want to go someplaceEurope, South America, the circus? Do we want a loving, healthyrelationship? Turn that into a goal. Is there something we've always wanted to dogo to school, work for a particularcompany, make $40,000 a year? Turn it into a goal. Do we need to decide
 
page_171
Page 172
what we want to do for a career? Turn making a decision into a goal. Do we want to grow closer to God, go tochurch every Sunday, or read the Bible every day? Turn it into a goal. Do we want to change something aboutourselveslearn to say no, make a particular decision, resolve some anger? Turn it into a goal. Do we want to improveour relationships with certain peoplechildren, friends, spouse, a relative? Turn it into a goal. Do we want to form new
relationships, lose weight, gain weight, quit worrying, stop controlling? Do we want to learn to have fun, learn to
enjoy sex, achieve acceptance of some particular person or incident, forgive someone? I believe we can successfully
turn every aspect of our lives into a goal. If it bothers us, make it a goal. If we're aware something needs to bechanged, make it a goal. If we want it, make it a goal.
·Omit the shoulds. We have enough shoulds controlling our lives; we don't need them in our goals. Make it a goal to get
rid of 75 percent of our shoulds.
·Don't limit ourselves. Go for all of it: everything we want and need, all the problems we want solved, all our desires,
and even some of our whims. Don't worry. If we're not supposed to have it, we won't. If we are supposed to have it, I
believe we'll stand an improved chance of getting it by turning it into a goal.
·Write our goals on paper. There is extraordinary power in jotting down goals, rather than storing them loosely in our
minds. We worry less, we have less to think about, and it gives focus and organization to our goals. Recording our goals
also helps us direct our energy and be in contact with our Higher Power. We don't have to write our goals neatly orperfectly, or use particular words or systems. Commit them to paperall of them.
·Commit our written goals to God. Tell God these are the things we're interested in, ask for His help, then surrender
humbly. It's called, "Thy will be done, not mine."·Let go. Keep our goals close, where we can look at them as we need to but don't worry and obsess about how, when, if,
and what if. Some people suggest we monitor our goals daily. I don't, except when I'm setting daily goals. But you can do
it any way you choose. Once my goals are on paper, I try to not control or force.
 
page_172
Page 173
·Do what we can, one day at a time. Within the framework of each 24-hour day, do what seems fitting and appropriate.
Do God's will for us, that day. Do what we are inspired to do. Do what comes our way that needs to be done. Do it inpeace and faith. Marvelous things can and do come to pass this way. Try it. We have to do our part. But I believe we canand will do our part best by doing it one day at a time. If it's time to do something, we'll know. If it's time for somethingto happen, it will. Trust ourselves and God.
·Set goals regularly and as needed. I like to do my annual goals at the beginning of each new year. It indicates to me that
I am interested in living my life that particular year. I don't believe in New Year's resolutions; I believe in goals. I also
write down goals as they occur to me throughout the year. If I am facing a problem, spot a need, feel a new want, I turnit into a goal and add it to my list. I also use goals to get me through crisis times, when I'm feeling shaky. Then, I writedown all the things I want and need to accomplish on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis.
·Check off the goals we reach.  Yes, we will start reaching our goals. Our wants and needs will get met. We will achieve
certain things that are important to us. When this happens, cross off that goal, congratulate ourselves, and thank God. We
will gain confidence in ourselves, in goal setting, in God, and in the rhythm of life this way. We will see for ourselvesthat good things do happen to us. Sometimes, we may experience a letdown when we reach a goal, if it's been animportant goal that's required much energy or if we've done "magical thinking" about reaching it. (Magical thinkingincludes thoughts such as, "I will live happily ever after once this problem is solved" or ''I will live happily ever afteronce I get a waterbed.") To avoid a letdown, it's important to have a long list of goals and avoid magical thinking. I'venever yet reached a goal or solved a problem that has enabled me to live happily ever after. Life goes on, and I try to livehappily and peacefully.
We may never be without a list of problems that we need to turn into goals. We will probably never be without wantsand needs. But this process of goal setting, besides making life more enjoyable, helps develop a certain faith in the ebband flow and general goodness of
 
page_173
Page 174
life. Problems arise. Problems get solved. Wants and needs come into awareness. Wants and needs get met. Dreams
are born. Dreams are reached. Things happen. Good things happen. Then, more problems arise. But it's all okay.
·Be patient. Trust in God's timing. Don't take an item off the list if it's still important to us just because we didn't achieve
or receive something when we thought we should have; the wretched shoulds infiltrate every area of our lives.
Sometimes, my goals carry over for years. When I do my annual goal setting, I have looked at my sheet and thought,"Oh, this problem will never get solved. It's been on my list for years." Or, "This dream will never come true. It's thefourth year in a row I've written it down." Or, "I'll never be able to change this character defect of mine.'' Not true. It justhasn't happened yet. Here is one of the best thoughts I've ever encountered on patience. It is an excerpt from DennisWholey's book on alcoholism, The Courage to Change.
I've started to realize that waiting is an art, that waiting achieves things. Waiting can be very, very powerful. Timeis a valuable thing. If you can wait two years, you can sometimes achieve something that you could not achievetoday, however hard you worked, however much money you threw up in the air, however many times you bangedyour head against the wall. . . . 4
Things happen when the time is rightwhen we're ready, when God is ready, when the world is ready. Give up. Let go.But keep it on our list.
We need to set goals for ourselves. Start todaywhen you finish this chapter. If you don't have any goals, make your first
goal "getting some goals." You probably won't start living happily ever after, but you may start living happily.
 
page_174
Page 175
Activity
1. Write your goals on a sheet of paper. Try to think of at least ten items such as wants, problems to be solved, and
changes in yourself. Write as many goals as come to mind.
2. Review the checklist of "codependency characteristics" in Chapter Four. Make it a goal to change any of those
characteristics that are a problem for you.
 
page_175
Page 177
17Communication
When you're doing what's right for you, it's okay to say it once, simply, and then refuse to discuss anything further. 1Toby Rice Drews
Read through the following conversations. You may identify with the dialogue, which appears in bold type, and the
italicized interpretations, which explain the codependents' intentions and thought patterns.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
Danielle is about to call Stacy on the telephone. Danielle wants Stacy to babysit Danielle's three children for theweekend, but she does not intend to ask Stacy to babysit; she intends to manipulate her into doing it. Pay attention to hertechniques.
Stacy: Hello.Danielle: Hi (mumbled). Sigh. The sigh means, "Poor me. I'm just so helpless. Ask me what's wrong. Rescue me."
Stacy: (After a long pause.) Oh, hi, Danielle. Glad you called. How're you doing? During the long pause, Stacy thought,
"Oh, no. Not her." Sighing and moaning again. "Good heavens, what does she want this time?"
Danielle: Sigh. Sigh. I'm doing about the same as always. Problems, you know. What Danielle is saying is: "C'mon. Ask
me what's wrong."
Stacy: (Again, after a long pause.) What's the matter? You sound terrible. During the long pause this time, Stacy thought:
"I'm not going to
 
page_177
Page 178
ask her what's wrong. I won't get trapped. I refuse to ask her what's wrong." Upon thinking this, Stacy felt angry, then
guilty (the rescue feelings), then went on to rescue Danielle by asking her what was wrong.
Danielle: Well, my husband just found out he's got to go out of town this weekend on his job, and he's asked me to come
with. I would love to go with him. You know I never get to go anywhere. But I don't know who I'd get to watch the kids.I hated to say no, but I had to turn him down. He feels so bad. I hope he doesn't get too mad at me. Oh, well, that's justthe way things go, I guess. Sigh. Sigh. Danielle is laying it on thick. She wants Stacy to feel sorry for her, guilty, andsorry for her husband Her words have been carefully chosen. Danielle, of course, told her husband she could go. Shetold her husband she was going to get Stacy to babysit
Stacy: (Long, long pause.) Well, I suppose I could see if I could maybe help you out. During the pause this time, Stacy
thought: "Oh, no. No, no, no. I hate watching her kids. She never watches mine. I don't want to. I won't. Darn her forputting me in this spot all the time. Rats. But how could I say no? I should help people. Do unto others. And she needsme so much. God, I don't want her to get angry at me. Besides, if I don't help her out, who will? She leads such apathetic life. But this is the last time. The last time ever." The feelings were anger, pity, guilt, saintly, and back to anger.Notice how she demeaned Danielle by labeling her helpless; notice her grandiose feelings of responsibility: "I'm the onlyperson in the world who can help her." Also, notice how she worded her response. She was hoping Danielle wouldnotice Stacy's lack of enthusiasm and rescue her by telling her to forget it.
Danielle: Would you really babysit? Thanks so much. You're the greatest. I never dreamt you'd actually do this for me.
"Ah, ha! Got what I wanted."
Stacy: No problem. Glad to help. "I don't want to do this. Why does this always happen to me?"
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
In the next conversation Robert wants his wife, Sally, to call his boss and tell him Robert is sick. Robert was out drinking
until 3 A.M. the
 
page_178
Page 179
evening before. His alcoholism is causing increasing problems at home and on the job. During the conversation he feels
sick, angry, guilty, and desperate. Sally feels the same way.
Robert: Good morning, honey. How's my sweetie pie today? "Heaven help me, I feel awful. I can't go to work. She's mad.
I can't face the boss. Better lather her up, get her to call in for me, and then I'll go back to bed. Better yet, I need anotherdrink. Quick."
Sally: I'm fine. (Said in a clipped, martyred voice after a cold stare, a dirty look, and a long silence.) What Sally meant
was: " I feel hurt. I feel angry. How could you do this to me? You were out again drinking last night. You promised notto do it anymore. Our lives are falling apart, and you don't care. Look at you: You're a mess. I can't stand this!"
Robert: Honey, I feel so sick today. I must be getting the flu. I can't even eat breakfast. Call my boss, okay? Tell him I'll
be in tomorrow, if I'm better. Could you do that for the old dad? C'mon. Be my little sweetheart. I'm so sick. "I'm
helpless, and I need you. Take care of me, and do it right now. I know you're angry at me, so I'll try to get you to feel
sorry for me."
Sally: I really don't think I should call your boss. He likes to talk to you when you're not going to come in. He always
has questions about things, and I can't answer them. Don't you think it would be better if you called? After all, you knowwhat you want to say. "I hate calling his boss. I hate lying for him. But if I say no, he'll get angry. I'll try to act morehelpless than he is."
Robert: What's with you, anyway? Can't you do that one little thing for me? Are you that selfish? I know you're mad at
me. You're always mad at me. It's no wonder I drink, with a wife like you. Go ahead. Don't call. But if I lose my job, it'syour fault. "How dare she refuse me?" he thinks. Then he decides it's time to get tough. He's got to get her to do this. Hedecides to throw a big portion of guilt at her, then top it off with a little fear. He knows she's worried about him losinghis job. While he's at it, he lays the groundwork for today's drinking.
Sally: Fine. I'll do it. But don't you ever ask me to do it again. And if you drink one more time, I'm leaving you. Feelingtrapped, Sally
 
page_179
Page 180
calls Robert's boss. Robert made his points well. He hit Sally on all her weak spots. She is afraid of being called selfish
because she thinks it would be terrible if she was selfish; she feels guilty because she knows she is mad all the time; shefeels responsible for Robert's drinking; and she is afraid of him losing his job. That business about leaving him if hedrank again was an empty threat; she has made no decision to leave Robert. And the next time Robert asks her, she willcall his boss again. After Sally makes the phone call she flies into a rage at Robert, persecuting him. She then ends upfeeling sorry for herself and victimized. She also continues to feel extremely guilty, harboring the thought that there issomething wrong with her for all her feelings and reactions, because Robert appears so powerful and she feels so weakand insecure.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
In this conversation, a counselor is talking to an alcoholic husband and his wife in a family therapy group. The coupleappears to be the perfect couple. This is not their first time attending this group, but it is the first time the counselorfocuses on them.
Counselor: Steven and Joanne, I'm glad you're both here tonight. How are you doing?Steven: We're doing great. Just great. Aren't we, Joanne?Joanne: (Smile). Yes. Everything's fine. (Nervous laugh.)Counselor: Joanne, you're laughing, but I sense something is wrong. It's okay to talk in here. It's okay to talk about your
feelings, and it's okay to talk about your problems. This is what this group is for. What's going on underneath yoursmile?
Joanne: (Her smile crumbles, and she begins crying.) I'm so sick of this. I'm so sick of him hitting me. I'm so sick of
being scared of him. I'm sick of the lies. I'm sick of the promises that are never kept. And I'm sick of being slappedaround.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
Now that we've "listened" to some codependents' talk, let's consider the dialogue we use. Many codependents have poorcommunication
 
page_180
Page 181
skills. We carefully choose our words to manipulate, people please, control, cover up, and alleviate guilt. Our
communication reeks of repressed feelings, repressed thoughts, ulterior motives, low self-worth, and shame. We laughwhen we want to cry, we say we're fine when we're not. We allow ourselves to be bullied and buried. We sometimesreact inappropriately. We justify, rationalize, compensate, and take others all around the block. We are nonassertive. Webadger and threaten, then back down. Sometimes we lie. Frequently, we are hostile. We apologize a lot, and hint at whatwe want and need.
Codependents are indirect. We don't say what we mean, we don't mean what we say. 2We don't do it on purpose. We do it because we've learned to communicate this way. At some point, either in our
childhood or adult family, we learned it was wrong to talk about problems, express feelings, and express opinions. We'velearned it was wrong to directly state what we want and need. It was certainly wrong to say no, and stand up forourselves. An alcoholic parent or spouse will be glad to teach these rules; we have been too willing to learn and acceptthem.
As John Powell asks in the title of his excellent book on communication: Why Am I Afraid to Tell You Who I Am? Why
are we afraid to tell people who we are? Each of us must answer that question. Powell says it's because who we are is allwe've got, and we're afraid of being rejected. 3 Some of us may be afraid because we're not sure who we are and what we
want to say. Many of us have been inhibited and controlled by one or more of the family rules I discussed earlier in thischapter. Some of us have had to follow these rules to protect ourselves, to survive. However, I believe most of us areafraid to tell people who we are because we don't believe it is okay to be who we are.
Many of us don't like and don't trust ourselves. We don't trust our thoughts. We don't trust our feelings. We think our
opinions stink. We don't think we have the right to say no. We're not sure what we want and need; if we do know, wefeel guilty about having wants and needs and we're surely not going to be up front about them. We may feel ashamed forhaving our problems. Many of us don't even trust our ability to
 
page_181
Page 182
accurately identify problems, and we're more than willing to back down if somebody else insists the problem isn't there.
Communication is not mystical. The words we speak reflect who we are: what we think, judge, feel, value, honor, love,
hate, fear, desire, hope for, believe in, and commit to. 4 If we think we're inappropriate to life our communication willreflect this: We will judge others as having all the answers; feel angry, hurt, scared, guilty, needy, and controlled by otherpeople. We will desire to control others, value pleasing others at any cost, and fear disapproval and abandonment. Wewill hope for everything but believe we deserve and will get nothing unless we force things to happen, and remaincommitted to being responsible for other people's feelings and behavior. We're congested with negative feelings andthoughts.
No wonder we have communication problems.Talking clearly and openly is not difficult. In fact, it's easy. And fun. Start by knowing that who we are is okay. Our
feelings and thoughts are okay. Our opinions count. It's okay to talk about our problems. And it's okay to say no.
We can  say nowhenever we want to. It's easy. Say it right now. Ten times. See how easy that was? By the way, other
people can say no, too. It makes it easier if we've got equal rights. Whenever our answer is no, start our response with the
word no, instead of saying, "I don't think so," or "Maybe," or some other wavering phrase. 5
Say what we mean, and mean what we say. If we don't know what we mean, be quiet and think about it. If our answer is,"I don't know," say "I don't know." Learn to be concise. Stop taking people all around the block. Get to the point andwhen we make it, stop.
Talk about our problems. We're not being disloyal to anyone by revealing who we are and what kinds of problems we're
working on. All we're doing is pretending by not being who we are. Share secrets with trusted friends who won't use
these against us or help us feel ashamed. We can make appropriate decisions about who to talk to, how much to tell them,
and when the best time to talk is.
 
page_182
Page 183
Express our feelings: openly, honestly, appropriately, and responsibly. Let others do the same. Learn the words: I feel.
Let others say those words and learn to listennot fixwhen they do.
We can say what we think. Learn to say: "This is what I think." Our opinions can be different from other people's
opinions. That doesn't mean we're wrong. We don't have to change our opinions, and neither does the other person,unless either of us wants to.
We can even be wrong.We can say what we expect, without demanding that other people change to suit our needs. Other people can say what
they expect, and we don't have to change to suit them, eitherif we don't want to.
We can express our wants and needs. Learn the words: "This is what I need from you. This is what I want from you."We can tell the truth. Lying about what we think, how we feel, and what we want isn't being politeit's lying.We don't have to be controlled by what other people say; we don't have to try to control them with our words and special
effects. We don't have to be manipulated, guilted, coerced, or forced into anything. We can open our mouths and takecare of ourselves! Learn to say: "I love you, but I love me, too. This is what I need to do to take care of me."
We can, as Earnie Larsen says, learn to ignore nonsense. We can refuse to talk to someone's illness, whether it is
alcoholism or another compulsive disorder. If it doesn't make sense, it doesn't make sense. We don't have to waste ourtime trying to make sense out of it or trying to convince the other person that what he or she said didn't make sense.Learn to say, "I don't want to discuss this."
We can be assertive and stand up for ourselves without being abrasive or aggressive. Learn to say: "This is as far as I go.
This is my limit. I will not tolerate this." And mean those words.
We can show compassion and concern without rescuing. Learn to say, "Sounds like you're having a problem. What do
you need from me?" Learn to say, "I'm sorry you're having that problem." Then, let it go. We don't have to fix it.
 
page_183
Page 184
We can discuss our feelings and problems without expecting people to rescue us too. We can settle for being listened to.
That's probably all we ever wanted anyway.
One common complaint I hear from codependents is, ''Nobody takes me seriously!" Take ourselves seriously. Balance
that with an appropriate sense of humor and we won't have to worry about what anyone else is or isn't doing.
Learn to listen to what people are saying and not saying. Learn to listen to ourselves, the tone of voice we use, the words
we choose, the way we express ourselves, and the thoughts going through our minds.
Talking is a tool and a delight. We talk to express ourselves. We talk to be listened to. Talking enables us to understand
ourselves and helps us understand other people. Talking helps us get messages to people. Sometimes we talk to achievecloseness and intimacy. Maybe we don't always have something earth-shattering to say, but we want contact with people.We want to bridge the gap. We want to share and be close. Sometimes we talk to have funto play, enjoy, banter, andentertain. There are times when we talk to take care of ourselvesto make it clear that we will not be bullied or abused,that we love ourselves, and that we have made decisions in our best interests. And sometimes we just talk.
We need to take responsibility for communication. Let our words reflect high self-esteem and esteem for others. Be
honest. Be direct. Be open. Be gentle and loving when that's appropriate. Be firm when the situation calls for firmness.
Above all else, be who we are and say what we need to say.
In love and dignity, speak the truthas we think, feel, and know itand it shall set us free.
Activity
1. Read these books: Why Am I Afraid to Tell You Who I Am? by John Powell, and How to Be an Assertive ( Not
Aggressive ) Woman in Life, in Love, and on the Job, by Jean Baer. How  to Be an Assertive Woman is an excellent
book for men, too.
 
page_184
Page 185
18
Work a Twelve Step Program
''How do the Twelve Steps work?""They work just fine, thank you." Anonymous AA./Al-Anon quote
I detest the disease of alcoholism. Chemical dependency and other compulsive disorders destroy peoplebeautiful,
intelligent, sensitive, creative, loving, caring people who do not deserve to be destroyed. The illnesses kill love anddreams, hurt children, and tear apart families. Alcoholism leaves in its wake sheared, fragmented, bewildered victims.Sometimes the early death it brings to the drinker causes far less pain than the wretched illness caused during his or herlifetime. It is a horrid, cunning, baffling, powerful, and deadly disease.
I unabashedly love Twelve Step programs. I have great respect for all of them: Alcoholics Anonymous, for people with a
desire to stop drinking; Al-Anon, for people affected by someone else's drinking; Alateen, for teenagers affected bysomeone's drinking; Al-Atots, for children affected by someone's drinking; and Narcotics Anonymous, for peopleaddicted to drugs.
Other Twelve Step programs that I respect include: Nar-Anon, for people affected by another's chemical addiction;
Overeaters Anonymous, for people with eating disorders; O-Anon, for people affected by others' eating disorders;Families Anonymous, for people concerned about the use of chemicals and/or related behavioral problems in a relative orfriend; Adult Children of Alcoholics, for adult children of alcoholics;
 
page_185
Page 186
Emotions Anonymous, for people with a desire to become well emotionally.
Other good Twelve Step programs include: Sex Addicts Anonymous, for people with compulsive sexual behavior; Co-
SA, for people affected by another person's sexual addiction; Gamblers Anonymous, for people with a desire to stopgambling; Gam-Anon, for people affected by another person's gambling; Parents Anonymous, for parents who areabusive, neglectful, or afraid of becoming so, or for adolescents who are encountering problems due to past or currentabuse; and Sex Abusers Anonymous. There may also be other programs which I have either overlooked or which havesprung into origin since the writing of this book.
Twelve Step programs are not merely self-help groups that help people with compulsive disorders stop doing whatever it
is they feel compelled to do (drinking, helping the drinker, etc.). The programs teach people how to livepeacefully,happily, successfully. They bring peace. They promote healing. They give life to their membersfrequently a richer,healthier life than those people knew before they developed whatever problem they developed. The Twelve Steps are away of life.
In this chapter I am going to focus on the programs for people who have been affected by another person's compulsive
disorder, because this is a book on codependency and that's what codependency is about. I am going to refer specifically
to the Al-Anon program, because that is one program I "work." (I will discuss that little piece of jargon, "working a
program," later.) However, with a bit of creativity on your part, the information I present can be applied to any of theTwelve Step programs.
The Twelve Steps
The Twelve Steps are at the heart of the Twelve Step programs. The Steps, in their basic forms (following in italics),
belong to various programs. But all of the programs adapted their Steps from those of Alcoholics Anonymous.
The interpretations following the Steps are my personal opinions and are not related to, endorsed by, or affiliated with
any Twelve Step pro-
 
page_186
Page 187
gram. The programs also have Traditions, which guard the purity of the programs to ensure that they continue to operate
effectively. The Eleventh Tradition in the Al-Anon program says, "Our public relations policy is based on attractionrather than promotion. . . ." 1 Please understand I am not promoting this program or any program. I am just saying what Ithink, and I happen to think highly of the Twelve Steps.
1. We admitted we were powerless over alcoholthat our lives had become unmanageable. This is an important Step. It
must be taken first. That is why it is the First Step. Much of our struggle to accept whatever it is we must accepta lovedone's alcoholism or eating problem, for example, brings us to this door. My denial, my bargains, my efforts to control,my rescuing, my anger, my hurt, my grief propelled me to this place. Not once, but twice in my lifetime, I had tried to dothe impossible. I tried to control alcohol. I had battled with alcohol in my own drinking and using days; I went to waragain with alcohol when people I loved were using and abusing it. Both times, I lost. When will I learn to quit fightinglions? Both times, alcohol gained control of meonce directly, through my own imbibing; the second time, indirectly,through another person's use of the substance. It didn't matter, though, how it had gained control. It had. My thoughts,emotions, behaviorsmy lifewere regulated and directed by alcohol and its effects on another person's life. People werecontrolling me, but those people were being controlled by alcohol. Once the light was turned on, it wasn't difficult to seewho was boss. The bottle was. Once I saw that, I could easily see my life had become unmanageable. Indeed, it had.Spiritually, emotionally, mentally, behaviorally, I was out of control. My relationships with people were unmanageable.My career was unmanageable. I couldn't even keep my house clean.
If this Step sounds like giving up, that's because it is. It is where we surrender to the truth. We are powerless over
alcohol. We are powerless over the disease of alcoholism. We are powerless over another person's drinking and theeffects of alcoholism in his or her life. We are powerless over peoplewhat they do, say, think, feel, or don't do, say, think,or feel. We have been trying to do the impossible. At this point we understand this and make a rational decision to quittrying to do what we
 
page_187
Page 188
cannot ever do, no matter how hard we try. At this point we turn our eyes to ourselvesto the ways we have been affected,
to our characteristics, to our pain. It sounds hopeless and defeatist, but it isn't. It is acceptance of what is. We can'tchange things we can't control, and trying to do that will make us crazy. This Step is appropriately humbling. It is alsothe bridge to the Second Step. For with our admission of powerlessness over that which we are truly powerless over, wereceive the power which is appropriately oursour own power to change ourselves and live our lives. When we quit tryingto do the impossible, we are allowed to do the possible.
2. Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity. If the First Step left us despairing, this
Step will bring hope. I did not doubt for a minute that I was crazy, once I stopped comparing myself to the crazy peoplearound me. The way I had been living was insane; the way I had not been living my life was insane. I needed to believe Icould become sane. I needed to believe the pain I felt could somehow be lessened. Listening to, talking with, andactually seeing people who had been as upset as I was, and seeing they had found peace in circumstances sometimes
worse than mine, helped me come to believe. There is no substitute for visualization. As someone once said, seeing is
believing.
And, yes, this is a spiritual program. Thank God we aren't left to our own devices any longer. This is not a do-it-yourself
program. This is not a do-it-yourself book. Do it yourself at your own risk. We are spiritual beings. We need a spiritualprogram. This program meets our spiritual needs. We are not talking about religion here; the word I used was spiritual.We select and come to terms with a Power greater than ourselves.
3. Made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God as  we understood Him . I had turned my will
and my life over to the care of alcohol and other drugs; I had turned my will and life over to the care of other human
beings (usually alcoholics); I had spent many years trying to impose my own plan onto the scheme of things. It was timeto remove myself from anyone or anything's control (including my own) and place myself in the hands of anextraordinarily loving God. "Take it," I said,
 
page_188
Page 189
"All of itwho I am, what's happened to me, where I shall go, and how I'll get there." I said it once. I say it every day.
Sometimes, I say it every half hour. This Step does not mean we resign ourselves to a bunch of shoulds and ought tos,and don our sackcloth. It in no way implies a continuation of martyrdom. The exciting thing about this Step is it meansthere is a purpose and a plana great, perfectly wonderful, usually enjoyable, and worthwhile plan that takes into accountour needs, wants, desires, abilities, talents, and feelingsfor each of our lives. This was good news to me. I thought I was amistake. I didn't think there was anything of significance planned for my life. I was just stumbling around, trying to makethe best out of being here when I learned this: We are here to live as long as we are alive, and there is a life for each ofus to live.
4. Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves. We take our eyes off the other person and look at
ourselves. We see just what we're working with, how we have been affected, what we are doing, what our characteristicsare, and we write on a piece of paper what we see. We look fearlessly, not in self-hate and self-castigation, but in anattitude of love, honesty, and self-care. We may even discover that hating ourselves, not loving ourselves enough, hasbeen a real moral problem. We root out any other problems, including earned guilt. We also look at our good qualities.We examine our hurts and angers. We examine ourselves and the part we have played in our lives. This Step also givesus an opportunity to examine the standards we judge ourselves by, choose those we believe to be appropriate, anddisregard the rest. We are now on our way to dumping our earned guilt, getting rid of our unearned guilt, accepting thepackage we call ourselves, and starting on the path to growth and change.
5. Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being the exact nature of our wrongs. Confession is good for the
soul. There is nothing like it. We don't have to hide any longer. We tell our worst, most shameful secrets to a trustedperson skilled in listening to the Fifth Step. We tell someone how hurt and angry we are. Someone listens. Someonecares. We are forgiven. Wounds begin to heal. We forgive. This Step is liberating.
 
page_189
Page 190
6. Were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character.  We realize some of the things we've been
doing to protect ourselves have been hurting us and possibly others. We decide we're ready to take a risk, and let go of
these outdated behaviors and attitudes. We become willing to be changed and to cooperate in the process of change. Iuse this and the next Step as daily tools to rid myself of any defects that come to my attention. I consider my low self-worth a defect, and I use this Step on it too.
7. Humbly asked Him to remove our shortcomings. From my experience, humbly seems to be the key here.8. Made a list of all persons we had harmed and became willing to make amends to them all. Willingness is the important
word here, although I suspect it's directly connected to humility. Don't forget to put ourselves on the list. Note that, asJael Greenleaf writes: "The Eighth Step does not read 'Made a list of all persons we had harmed and became willing tofeel guilty about it.' " 2 This is our chance to take care of our earned guilt. This is an important Step in a tool that will beavailable to us all our lives so we no longer have to feel guilty.
9. Made direct amends to such people wherever possible except when to do so would injure them or others. This is a
simple Step in a simple program. Sometimes the simplest things help us feel happy.
10. Continued to take personal inventory and when we were wrong, promptly admitted it. We keep our eyes on ourselves.
We continually and regularly evaluate our behavior. We figure out what we like about ourselves, what we've done rightand good. Then we either congratulate ourselves, feel good about it, thank God, or do all three. We figure out what wedon't like that we've been doing, then we figure out how to accept and take care of that without hating ourselves for it.Here's the difficult part: if we're wrong, we say so. If we have worked Steps Eight and Nine and dumped all our guiltyfeelings, we will know when we need to say "I'm wrong" and "I'm sorry." We will feel earned guilt, and we will be ableto notice it. If, however, we are still feeling guilty all the time, it may be difficult to distinguish when we do somethingwrong because we're feeling guilty all the time and we don't feel any different. It's just one more
 
page_190
Page 191
shovel of guilt thrown onto an already heaping pile. The moral of that story is: Dump guilt. If we get some, take care of it
immediately.
11. Sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious con tact with God as we understood Him, praying
only for knowledge of His will for us and the power to carry that out. This Step, used daily and as needed, will
successfully take us through our entire lives. This Step requires we learn the difference between rumination andmeditation. It also requires us to decide whether we believe God is benevolent. We need to decide if we believe God"knows where we live," as another friend says. Get quiet. Detach. Pray. Meditate. Ask Him what He wants us to do. Askto be given the power to do that. Then let go and watch what happens. Usually, His will is an appropriate, common-senseapproach to life. Sometimes, we get surprises. Learn to trust this Higher Power to whom we have given the guardianshipof our lives. Become sensitive to how He works with us. Learn to trust ourselves. He works through us too.
12. Having had a spiritual awakening as the result of these steps, we tried to carry this message to others, and to practice
these principles in all our affairs. * We will awaken spiritually. We will learn to spiritually take care of ourselvesnot
religiously, although that certainly is part of life. This program will enable us to love ourselves and other people, insteadof rescuing and being rescued. Carrying the message does not mean we become evangelists; it means our lives become alight. We will learn how to shine. If we apply this program to all areas of our lives, it will work in all areas of our lives.
Working the Program
Now that we are familiar with the Steps, let's discuss what "working the program" and "working the Steps" mean. All
over the world, ''anony-
*The Twelve Steps printed here are those of Al-Anon, adapted from the Twelve Steps of Alcoholics Anonymous,found in Alcoholics Anonymous, A.A. World Services, New York, NY, pp. 59-60. Reprinted with permission.
 
page_191
Page 192
mous" people meet at a variety of locationschurches, homes, and barber shops. They might meet once a day, twice aweek, or seven nights a week. They don't preregister or register. They simply find out where a particular group meets thatfocuses on the problem these people are having troubles with. At the meeting, they don't have to identify their last namesor where they or their spouse work; they don't have to say anything if they don't want to. They don't have to pay money,although they can make a donation of any amount to help pay for coffee and meeting room rent expensesif they want to.They don't have to sign up. They don't have to fill out a card. They don't have to answer any questions. They just walk inand sit down. This is called going to a meeting. It is an essential part of working the program.
One nice thing about meetings is that people can be who they are. They don't have to pretend they don't have a particular
problem, because everybody there has the same problem. If they didn't have that problem, they wouldn't be there.
Meeting formats vary with each particular group. Some groups sit around a table and the people who want to talk,
discuss feelings or problems. Some meetings are speaker meetings, where one person gets up in front of everyone and
talks about a Step or an experience. At some groups, the Steps are the theme and the people just put their chairs in a
circle and each person gets a chance to say something about whatever Step is the theme that day. There are manymeeting variations, but usually the meetings have something to do with the Steps, the Traditions, or topics related to theproblem. People learn about the Steps at the meetings, and they learn what the Steps mean to other people. They also hearslogans. Al-Anon and A.A. slogans include such catchy little sayings as: Let Go and Let God, Easy Does It, and One Dayat a Time. The reason these sayings have become slogans is because they are true. And even if people get sick of sayingand hearing these slogans, they keep repeating and listening to them because they are so true. And the slogans helppeople feel better. After the meeting is over, people usually stay and chat or go out to a restaurant and have a soda orcoffee. Learning the Steps and
 
page_192
Page 193
slogans, listening to other people's experiences, sharing personal experiences, and fellowship, are parts of working the
program.
At the meetings, books, pamphlets, and literature are sold at cost. These books contain information on the problems
common to that group. Some groups sell meditation books which contain suggestions for approaching each day. Readingthe literature and reading the daily meditation books are parts of working the program. People have something to takehome and do through the literature. They are reminded of what they learned at the meeting, and sometimes they learnnew things.
During their daily routines, the people who go to these meetings think about the Steps and slogans. They try to figure out
how the Steps and slogans apply to them, what they're feeling, what they're doing, and what's going on in their lives atthat particular time. They do this regularly and when a problem arises. Sometimes, they call someone they met at themeeting and discuss a problem with that person or tell that person how they're doing that day. Sometimes, these peopledo the things a Step suggests they do, such as write out an inventory, make a list of people they have harmed, or make anappropriate amend. If these people think about and work these Steps enough, eventually the Twelve Steps may becomehabitshabitual ways of thinking, behaving, and handling situationsmuch the same as codependent characteristics becomehabits. When they become habits, the program becomes a way of life. This is called working the Steps and working theprogram.
That's all there is to working a program. Twelve Step programs are simple and basic. People don't graduate and go on to
more complicated thingsthey stick with the basics. Twelve Step programs work because they are simple and basic.
I get excited about such simple things as going to meetings and working the Steps. I can try to explain, but words only
convey a little bit of the important idea here. Something happens if we go to these meetings and work a program. Apeace and a healing sets in. We start to change and feel better. The Steps are something we work on, but they also workon us. There is magic at these meetings.
 
page_193
Page 194
We never have to do anything we are unable to do, truly find offensive, or don't want to do. When it is time to do or
change a certain thing, we will know it is time and we will want to do it. There will be a rightness and an appropriatenessto it. Our lives begin to work this way, too. Healinggrowthbecomes a natural process. The Twelve Steps capture and are aformula for man's natural healing process. 3 Upon reading them, we may not think the Steps look like much and certainlynot like enough to get as excited as I am about them, but when we work them something happens. They appear. Theirpower appears. We may not understand until it happens to us.
The best description of the Twelve Steps I have heard was the "invisible boat" story, told by a man at a meeting I
attended recently. He was talking about A.A., but his story applies to Al-Anon and other groups. I have changed some ofhis words so his idea fits Al-Anon, but here is the essence of his analogy:
Picture ourselves standing on the shore. Way across the water is an island called serenity, where peace, happiness,and freedom exist from the despair of alcoholism and other problems. We really want to get to that island, but
we've got to find a way to get across the waterthat huge void that stands between us and where we want to be.
We have two choices. In the water is an ocean liner, a cruise ship that looks real posh and cozy. It's called
treatment, therapy. Next to it, on the beach, sits a group of odd-looking people. They appear to be rowing a boat,but we can't see a boat, and we can't see the oars. We only see these happy people sitting on the beach, rowing aninvisible boat with invisible oars. The invisible boat is called Al-Anon (or A.A. or any other Twelve Stepprogram). The ocean liner honks, summoning us aboard the treatment and therapy cruise. We can see the peopleon board: they're happy and waving to us. Then there's these goofy people hollering at us to join them in theirinvisible boat. Would we choose the liner or the invisible boat? Of course, we'll get on the ocean liner, the luxury
 
page_194
Page 195
cruise. The next thing we know, we're heading toward that island of happiness.
The problem is about mid-way across the water, the ocean liner stops, turns around, and heads back to the shorewhere we started from. Then the captain orders everyone off the ship. When we ask, ''Why?" he says, "Our cruiseonly goes so far. The only way you can ever get to that island is by getting in the invisible boat (called Al-Anon)."
So we shrug our shoulders and walk over to the people in the boat. "Get in!" they holler. "We can't see any boatto get into!" we holler back. "Get in anyway," they say. So we get in, and pretty soon they say, ''Pick up an oarand start rowing (working the Steps)." "Can't see any oars," we holler back. "Pick 'em up and start rowing,anyway!" they say. So we pick up invisible oars and start rowing, and pretty soon we see the boat. Before weknow it, we see the oars too. Next thing we know, we're so happy rowing the boat with the goofy people we don'tcare if we ever get to the other side. 4
That is the magic of the Twelve Step programsthey work. I am not saying, implying, or suggesting treatment and therapyare not helpful. They are. For many of us, treatment or a little therapy is just what we need to get started on our journey.But that ride ends and if we have a compulsive disorder or love someone with a compulsive disorder, we may discoverwe need to get on the invisible boat with those happy people.
At the end of this chapter, I have included tests we can take to help determine if we are candidates for Al-Anon, Alateen,
or O-Anon. I have also included further questions from Adult Children of Alcoholics (ACOA). Please understand that the"anon" and ACOA groups are not for people with the drinking problem; they are for people who have been affected bysomeone else's problem. People frequently misunderstand this. Also, many chemically dependent people who attend A.A.find they also need to go to Al-Anon or ACOA to deal with their codependent characteristics. If you believe you mightbe a candidate for any of the Twelve Step programsif you even suspect you have a problem common to one
 
page_195
Page 196
of the groups I discussed at the beginning of this chapterfind a group and start going to meetings. It will help you feel
better.
I know it's difficult to go to meetings. I know it's difficult to present ourselves to a group of strangers and hold up our
problem for the world to see. I know many of us probably don't understand how going to meetings could helpanythingespecially if the other person has the problem. But it will help. I was so angry when I started attending Al-Anonmeetings. I was already working a program for my alcoholism. I didn't want or need another program or another problemin my life to work on. Besides, I felt I had already done enough to help the alcoholics in my life. Why should I  have to
go to meetings? The alcoholics were the ones who needed help. At my first meeting, some cheery little woman walkedup to me, talked to me for a few minutes, smiled, and said, "Aren't you lucky? You're a double winner. You get to workboth programs!" I wanted to choke her. Now, I agree. I am lucky. I am a double winner.
Some of us may be reluctant to go to meetings because we feel we've already done enough for the other people in our
lives. Well, we're right. We probably have. That's why it's important to go to our meetings. We're going for ourselves.
Others of us may want to go only to help the other people, and may feel disappointed that the meetings expect us to work
on ourselves. That's okay, too. Health begets health. If we start working on ourselves, our good health may rub off on the
other people, in the same fashion that their illness rubbed off on us.
Some of us may be embarrassed to go. All I could do at the first meetings I attended was sit and cry, and I felt terribly
awkward. But for once, it was a good cry. My tears were tears of healing. I needed to sit and cry. When I stopped cryingand looked around, I saw other people crying too. Al-Anon is a safe place to go and be who we are. The people thereunderstand. So will you.
I've addressed most of the common objections I've heard to attending meetings. There may be other objections, but if we
qualify for membership in a program, go anyway. I won't be talked down. The Twelve Steps are God's gift to people withcompulsive disorders and to people
 
page_196
Page 197
who love people with compulsive disorders. If you're feeling crazy and reacting to people and things, go. If you don't like
the first group you attend, find another meeting and go there. Each group has its own personality. Continue going todifferent groups until you find one that feels comfortable. If you used to go to meetings but stopped going, go back. Ifyou start going, go for the rest of your life. Alcoholism is a lifetime illness that requires a lifetime of treatment. Ourcodependent characteristics become habits and may be tendencies we lean toward for the rest of our lives. Go whetherthe other people in your life get better or sicker.
Go until you feel grateful that you can go. In the words of one man, "Isn't it nice they have these meetings and they let
me come to them? Nobody else wants me around when I get this crazy. The people here just smile, shake my hand, andsay: 'We're glad you're here. Please come again.' "
Go until you see the boat and the oars and you get happy. Go until the magic works on you. And don't worryif you go
long enough, the magic will work.
Activity
1. Complete the tests or read over the list of characteristics on the following pages.
2. If you are a candidate for any of the programs discussed in this chapter, look in the phone book or call an appropriate
human services organization in your community. Find out where and when meetings are being held, then go.
 
page_197
Page 198
Al-Anon: Is It For You?
Millions of people are affected by the excessive drinking of someone close. The following twenty questions are designed
to help you decide whether or not you need Al-Anon.
1. Do you worry about how much someone else Yes No
drinks?2. Do you have money problems because of someone Yes No
else's drinking?3. Do you tell lies to cover up for someone else's Yes No
drinking?4. Do you feel that drinking is more important to your Yes No
loved one than you are?
5. Do you think that the drinker's behavior is caused Yes No
by his or her companions?
6. Are mealtimes frequently delayed because of the Yes No
drinker?7. Do you make threats, such as, "If you don't stop Yes No
drinking I'll leave you"?8. When you kiss the drinker hello, do you secretly Yes No
try to smell his or her breath?9. Are you afraid to upset someone for fear it will set Yes No
off a drinking bout?10. Have you been hurt or embarrassed by a drinker's Yes No
behavior?11. Does it seem as if every holiday is spoiled because Yes No
of drinking?12. Have you considered calling the police because of Yes No
drinking behavior?13. Do you find yourself searching for hidden liquor? Yes No
14. Do you feel that if the drinker loved you, he or she Yes No
would stop drinking to please you?15. Have you refused social invitations out of fear or Yes No
anxiety?
 
page_198
Page 199
16. Do you sometimes feel guilty when you think of the Yes No
lengths you have gone to to control the drinker?
17. Do you think that if the drinker stopped drinking, Yes No
your other problems would be solved?18. Do you ever threaten to hurt yourself to scare the Yes No
drinker into saying, "I'm sorry" or "I love you'?19. Do you ever treat people (children, employees, Yes No
parents, co-workers, etc.) unjustly because you are
angry at someone else for drinking too much?
20. Do you feel there is no one who understands your Yes No
problems?
If you answered yes to three or more of these questions, Al-Anon or Alateen may help. You can contact Al-Anon or
Alateen by looking in your local telephone directory. 5
 
page_199
Page 200
Are You an Eating Disorder Codependent?
Use this questionnaire from Fat Is a Family Affair to evaluate the extent of your involvement with an under- or
overeater.
Do you force diets?Do you threaten to leave due to weight?Do you check on the diet?Do you make promises based on pounds lost or gained?Do you hide food from an overeater?Do you worry incessantly about an undereater?Have you "walked on eggshells" so as not to upset the over/undereater?Do you throw food away so the overeater won't find it?Have you excused the erratic, sometimes violent, mood swings resulting from sugar binges?Do you change social activities so the overeater won't be tempted?Do you manipulate budgets to control spending on food and clothing?Do you purchase and promote eating the "right" foods?Do you promote gyms, health spas, and miracle cures?Do you break into emotional tirades when you catch the overeater bingeing?Are you constantly disappointed when you see relapse?Are you embarrassed by the over/undereater's appearance?Do you falsely console the over/undereater when he or she is embarrassed?Do you set up tests of willpower to test the over/undereater?Have you lowered your expectations of what you might like?Does your weight fluctuate with your loved one's (you up, he or she down)?Have you stopped attending to your own grooming?Do you have many aches and pains, and preoccupation with health?
Are you drinking heavily or using sleeping pills or tranquilizers?
Do you bribe with food?
Do you talk about the eater's body to him or her or to others?
 
page_200
Page 201
Do you feel life will be perfect if the over/undereater shapes up?
Are you grateful you aren't "that bad"?Does his or her eating disorder give you license to run away?Does his or her eating disorder give you an excuse to stay?Do you "subtly" leave "helpful" literature around the house?Do you read diet books though you have no weight problem?Do you think you have the perfect home, except for the over/ undereater?Do you use pills to get to sleep and escape worry?Have you spent much time in your own therapy talking about the over/ undereater?
 
page_201
Page 202
Progression of a Codependent Personality
This is also from Fat Is a Family Affair. It is meant to be used as a checklist to monitor your own progression.Early Stages_____Often born of dysfunctional family and learned to "care" for others as measure of self-worth._____Failed to cure parents so will "cure" the over/undereater._____Finds over/undereater who is "needy" so controls._____Begins doubting own perceptions and wants to control eating to show decisiveness._____Social life affected. Isolated self from community to "help" over/undereater.Obsession_____Makes pleas and threats related to the eating behavior._____Judges self and feels the cause of eating/starving._____Hides food._____Attempts controlling eating, hiding food, idle threats, nagging scolding._____Shows anger and disappointment regarding the over/undereater's promises.Secret Life_____Becomes obsessed with watching and covering up.
_____Takes over responsibilities of the over/undereater.
_____Takes pivotal role in communications, excluding contact between the over/undereater and others.
_____Expresses anger inappropriately.
 
page_202
Page 203
Out of Control
____Makes violent attempts to control eating. Fights with the over/ undereater.____Lets self go physically and mentally.____Has extramarital affairs such as infidelity, workaholism, obsession with outside interests.____Becomes rigid, possessive. Appears angry most of the time and careful and secretive about home life.____Has related illness and drug abuse: ulcers, rashes, migraines, depression, obesity, tranquilizer use.____Constantly loses temper.____Becomes sick and tired of being sick and tired. 6
 
page_203
Page 204
Adult Children of Alcoholics
Are you an adult child of an alcoholic? Following are fourteen questions you may find relevant to your life and
personality.
1. Do I often feel isolated and afraid of people, especially authority figures?2. Have I observed myself to be an approval seeker, losing my own identity in the process?3. Do I feel overly frightened of angry people and personal criticism?4. Do I often feel I'm a victim in personal and career relationships?
5. Do I sometimes feel I have an overdeveloped sense of responsibility, which makes it easier to be concerned with
others rather than myself?
6. Do I find it hard to look at my own faults and my own responsibility to myself?
7. Do I get guilt feelings when I stand up for myself instead of giving in to others?8. Do I feel addicted to excitement?9. Do I confuse love with pity and tend to love people I can pity and rescue?10. Do I find it hard to feel or express feelings, including feelings such as joy or happiness?11. Do I find I judge myself harshly?12. Do I have a low sense of self-esteem?13. Do I often feel abandoned in the course of my relationships?14. Do I tend to be a reactor, instead of an actor?
 
page_204
Page 205
The Twelve Steps of A.A.*
1. We admitted we were powerless over alcoholthat our lives had become unmanageable.2. Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity.3. Made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God as we understood Him.4. Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.5. Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being the exact nature of our wrongs.6. Were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character.7. Humbly asked Him to remove our shortcomings.8. Made a list of all persons we had harmed, and became willing to make amends to them all.9. Made direct amends to such people wherever possible, except when to do so would injure them or others.10. Continued to take personal inventory and when we were wrong promptly admitted it.
*The Twelve Steps are taken from Alcoholics Anonymous, published by A.A. World Services, New York, NY,
pp. 59-60. Reprinted with permission.
 
page_205
Page 206
11. Sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious contact with God as we understood Him,  praying
only for knowledge of His will for us and the power to carry that out.
12. Having had a spiritual awakening as the result of these Steps, we tried to carry this message to alcoholics, and to
practice these principles in all our affairs.
 
page_206
Page 207
19Pieces and Bits
When Prince Charming does come along,I'll probably be down at the pond kissing frogs. 1
This chapter contains miscellaneous tidbits about codependency and self-care.
Drama Addicts
Many codependents become what some people call drama or crises addicts. Strangely enough, problems can become
addicting. If we live with enough misery, crises, and turmoil long enough, the fear and stimulation caused by problemscan become a comfortable emotional experience. In her excellent book, Getting Them Sober, Volume II, Toby RiceDrews refers to this feeling as ''excited misery.'' 2 After a while, we can become so used to involving our emotions with
problems and crises that we may get and stay involved with problems that aren't our concern. We may even start making
troubles or making troubles greater than they are to create stimulation for ourselves. This is especially true if we have
greatly neglected our own lives and feelings. When we're involved with a problem, we know we're alive. When the
problem is solved, we may feel empty and void of feeling. Nothing to do. Being in crisis becomes a comfortable place,and it saves us from our humdrum existence. It's like getting addicted to soap operas, except the daily crises occur in ourlives
 
page_207
Page 208
and the lives of our friends and family. "Will Ginny leave John?" "Can we save Herman's job?" "How will Henrietta
survive this dilemma?"
After we have detached and begun minding our own business and our lives finally become serene, some codependents
still occasionally crave a little of the old excitement. We may at times find our new way of life boring. We are just usedto so much turmoil and excitement that peace seems bland at first. We'll get used to it. As we develop our lives, set ourgoals, and find things to do that interest us, peace will become comfortablemore comfortable than chaos. We will nolonger need nor desire excited misery.
We need to learn to recognize when we are seeking out "excited misery." Understand that we don't have to make
problems or get involved with others' problems. Find creative ways to fill our need for drama. Get enjoyable jobs. Butkeep the excited misery out of our lives.
Expectations
Expectations can be a confusing topic. Most of us have expectations. We entertain certain notions, on some level of
consciousness, about how we hope things will turn out or how we want people to behave. But it is better to relinquishexpectations, so we can detach. It is better to refrain from forcing our expectations on others or refrain from trying tocontrol the outcome of events, since doing so causes problems and is usually impossible anyway. So where do we gowith our expectations?
Some people strive to relinquish all expectations and live moment to moment. That is admirable. But I think the
important idea here is to take responsibility for our expectations. Get them out into the light. Examine them. Talk aboutthem. If they involve other people, talk to the people involved. Find out if they have similar expectations. See if they'rerealistic. For example, expecting healthy behavior from unhealthy people is futile; expecting different results from thesame behaviors, according to Earnie Larsen, is insane. Then, let go. See how things turn out. Let things happenwithoutforcing. If we are constantly disappointed, we may
 
page_208
Page 209
have a problem to solveeither with ourselves, another person, or a situation.
It's okay to have expectations. At times, they are real clues to what we want, need, hope for, and fear. We have a right to
expect good things and appropriate behavior. We will probably get more of these things (the good stuff and theappropriate behavior) if we consistently expect these things. If we have expectations, we will also realize when they arenot being met. But we need to realize these are only expectations; they belong to us, and we're not always boss. We canmake sure our expectations are realistic and appropriate and not let them interfere with reality or let them spoil the goodthings that are happening.
Fear of Intimacy
Most people want and need love. Most people want and need to be close to people. But fear is an equally strong force,
and it competes with our need for love. More specifically, this force is fear of intimacy.
For many of us, it feels safer to be alone or in relationships where we are "unemotionally involved" than it does to be
emotionally vulnerable, close, and loving. I understand that. In spite of the range of needs and wants that go unmet whenwe don't love, it may feel safer to not love. We don't risk the uncertainty and vulnerability of closeness. We don't risk the
pain of loving, and for many of us love has caused a great deal of pain. We don't risk being trapped by ourselves in
relationships that don't work. We don't risk having to be who we are, which includes being emotionally honest and the
possible rejections of that. We don't risk people abandoning us; we don't risk. And we don't have to go through theawkwardness of initiating relationships. When we don't get close to people, at least we know what to expect: nothing.Denial of love feelings protects us from the anxiety caused by loving. Love and closeness often bring a sense of loss ofcontrol. Love and closeness challenge our deepest fears about who we are and whether it is okay to be ourselves, andabout who others are and whether that is okay. Love and closenessinvolvement
 
page_209
Page 210
with peopleare the greatest risks a man or woman can take. They require honesty, spontaneity, vulnerability, trust,
responsibility, self-acceptance, and acceptance of others. Love brings joy and warmth, but it also requires us to bewilling to occasionally feel hurt and rejection.
Many of us have learned to run from closeness, rather than take the risks involved. We run from love or prevent
closeness in many ways. We push people away or do hurtful things to them so they won't want to be close to us. We doridiculous things in our minds to talk ourselves out of wanting to be close. We find fault with everyone we meet; wereject people before they have a chance to reject us. We wear masks and pretend to be something other than who we are.We scatter our energies and emotions among so many relationships that we don't get too close or vulnerable to anyoneatechnique called "watering down the milk" by one person. We settle for artificial relationships, where we will not beexpected nor asked to be close. We play roles instead of being a real person. We withdraw emotionally in our existingrelationships. Sometimes, we prevent closeness by simply refusing to be honest and open. Some of us sit, paralyzed byfear, unable to initiate relationships or enjoy closeness in existing relationships. Some of us run; we physically removeourselves from any situation where love, emotional vulnerability, and risk are or might be present. As a friend says, "Weall have a pair of track shoes in our closet."
We run from intimacy for many reasons. Some of us, particularly those of us who grew up in alcoholic family situations,
may never have learned how to initiate relationships and how to be close once a relationship begins. Closeness was notsafe, taught, or allowed in our families. For many people, caretaking and chemical use became substitutes for intimacy.
Some of us allowed ourselves to get close once or twice, then got hurt. We may have decided (on some level) that it was
better and safer not to get close, not to risk being hurt again.
Some of us learned to run from relationships that aren't good for us. But for some of us, running from or avoiding
closeness and intimacy may
 
page_210
Page 211
have become a habit, a destructive habit that prevents us from getting the love and closeness we really want and need.
Some of us may be tricking ourselves, so we're not even aware we're running or what we're running from. We may berunning when it isn't necessary.
Closeness to people may look like scary, mind-boggling business, but it doesn't have to be that scary. And it's not that
difficult. It even feels good, when we relax and let it happen.
It's okay to feel afraid of closeness and love, but it's also okay to allow ourselves to love and feel close to people. It's
okay to give and receive love. We can make good decisions about who to love and when to do that. It's okay for us to bewho we are around people. Take the risk of doing that. We can trust ourselves. We can go through the awkwardness andfriction of initiating relationships. We can find people who are safe to trust. We can open up, become honest, and be whowe are. We can even handle feeling hurt or rejected from time to time. We can love without losing ourselves or giving upour boundaries. We can love and think at the same time. We can take off our track shoes.
We can ask ourselves, are we preventing closeness in our existing relationship? How are we doing that? Is it necessary?
Why? Do we know someone we want to be close tosomeone who would be safe to be close to? Why don't we take stepsto get close to that person? Would we like to initiate some new relationships? How could we do that? Are we needing
and wanting more intimacy in our relationships but settling for less? Why?
Financial Responsibility
Some codependents become financially dependent on other people. Sometimes this is by agreement; for example, a wife
stays home and raises the children while the husband works and provides the money. Sometimes this is not byagreement. Some codependents become so victimized that we believe we cannot take care of ourselves financially. Manycodependents were, at one time, financially responsible, but as alcoholism or
 
page_211
Page 212
another problem progressed in a loved one we simply became too upset to work. Some of us just gave up: "If you don't
care about the money, then neither do I."
Sometimes, codependents become financially responsible for other adults. I have frequently seen a codependent wife
work two or even three jobs, while her husband brings home not one pennyyet he continues to eat, watch television, andlive rent free.
Neither way is preferable. Each person is financially responsible for him- or herself as well as in all other ways. That
does not mean housewives have to work at paying jobs to be financially responsible. Homemaking is a job, a heroic andadmirable one. If that is what a man or woman chooses to do, then I believe that person is earning his or her share. Beingfinancially responsible also does not mean all things have to be equal. Assuming financial responsibility for oneself is anattitude. It means figuring out exactly what our responsibilities are, then setting out to take care of those responsibilities.It also means we alloweven insistother people be financially responsible for themselves. That includes becoming familiarwith all areas of one's finances and deciding which task belongs to which person. Which bills need to be paid? When?When are taxes due? How much money has to last for how long? What's our part in all this? Are we doing less or morethan our appropriate share? If it is not our responsibility to hold a salaried job, do we at least understand we maysomeday need to work? Do we feel financially responsible for ourselves? Or does this frighten us? Are the people aroundus assuming appropriate financial responsibility for themselves, or are we doing it for them?
Taking care of money is part of life. Earning money, paying bills, and feeling financially responsible is part of taking
care of ourselves. Many codependents who have quit a job to control a spouse or who have otherwise centered their livesaround a person and neglected their own careers, have discovered even a low-paying, part-time job does wonders fortheir self-esteem. We forgot we are worth money and someone will actually pay for our abilities. Many of uscodependents, who have been financially dependent on a spouse, also like the freedom of having our
 
page_212
Page 213
own money. It's called a good feeling. It's something to think about as we begin living our own lives.
Being financially dependent on a person can trigger emotional dependency. Emotional dependency on a person can
trigger financial dependency. 3 Becoming financially responsible for ourselveshowever we accomplish thatcan helptrigger undependence.
Forgiveness
Compulsive disorders such as alcoholism twist and distort many good things, including the great principle of forgiveness.
We repeatedly forgive the same people. We hear promises, we believe lies, and we try to forgive some more. Some of usmay have reached a point where we cannot forgive. Some of us may not want to, because to forgive would leave usvulnerable to further hurt and we believe we cannot endure more pain. Forgiveness turns on us and becomes a painfulexperience.
Some of us may be truly trying to forgive; some of us may think we have forgiven, but the hurt and anger just won't
disappear.
Some of us can't keep up with the things we need to forgive; the problems are happening so fast we barely know what's
going on. Before we can register the hurt and say, "I forgive," another nasty thing has been dumped on us.
Then we feel guilty because someone asks, "Why can't you just forgive and forget?" People uninformed about the disease
of alcoholism and other compulsive disorders frequently ask that. For many of us, the problem is not forgetting.Forgiving and forgetting feed our denial system. We need to think about, remember, understand, and make gooddecisions about what we are forgiving, what can be forgotten, and what is still a problem. And forgiving someone doesnot mean we have to let that person keep hurting us. An alcoholic doesn't need forgiveness; he or she needs treatment.We don't need to forgive the alcoholic, at least not initially. We need to step back so he or she can't keep stomping onour toes.
I am not suggesting we adopt an unforgiving attitude. We all need forgiveness. Grudges and anger hurt us; they don't
help the other person
 
page_213
Page 214
much either. Forgiveness is wonderful. It wipes the slate clean. It clears up guilt. It brings peace and harmony. It
acknowledges and accepts the humanness we all share, and it says, "That's okay. I love you anyway." But I believe wecodependents need to be gentle, loving, and forgiving with ourselves before we can expect to forgive others. But Ibelieve codependents need to think about how, why, and when we dole out forgiveness.
Also, forgiveness is closely tied into the acceptance or grief process. We cannot forgive someone for doing something if
we have not fully accepted what this person has done. It does little good to forgive an alcoholic for going on a binge, ifwe have not yet accepted his or her disease of alcoholism. Ironically, the kind of forgiveness we often give to soothe analcoholic's "morning after" remorse may help him or her continue drinking.
Forgiveness comes in timein its own timeif we are striving to take care of ourselves. Don't let other people use this
principle against us. Don't let other people help us feel guilty because they think we should forgive someone, and we areeither not ready or believe forgiveness is not the appropriate solution. Take responsibility for forgiveness. We can doleout forgiveness appropriately based on good decisions, high self-esteem, and knowledge of the problem we are workingon. Don't misuse forgiveness to justify hurting ourselves; don't misuse it to help other people continue hurtingthemselves. We can work our program, live our own lives, and take the Fourth and Fifth Steps. If we are taking care ofus, we will understand what to forgive and when it's time to do that.
While we're at it, don't forget to forgive ourselves.
The Frog Syndrome
There is an anecdote circulating through codependency groups. It goes like this: "Did you hear about the woman who
kissed a frog? She was hoping it would turn into a prince. It didn't. She turned into a frog too."
Many codependents like to kiss frogs. We see so much good in them. Some of us even become chronically attracted to
frogs after kissing
 
page_214
Page 215
enough of them. Alcoholics and people with other compulsive disorders are attractive people. They radiate power,
energy, and charm. They promise the world. Never mind that they deliver pain, suffering, and anguish. The words theysay sound so good.
If we don't deal with our codependent characteristics, probabilities dictate we will continue to be attracted to and kiss
frogs. Even if we deal with our characteristics, we may still lean toward frogs, but we can learn not to jump into the pondwith them.
Fun
Fun does not go hand in hand with codependency. It is difficult to have fun when we hate ourselves. It is difficult to
enjoy life when there is no money for groceries because the alcoholic has drunk it all up. It is almost impossible to havefun when we are bottled up with repressed emotions, worried sick about someone, saturated with guilt and despair,rigidly controlling ourselves or someone else, or worried about what other people are thinking about us. However, mostpeople aren't thinking about us; they're worried about themselves and what we think of them.
As codependents, we need to learn to play and enjoy ourselves. Arranging for and allowing ourselves to have fun is an
important part of taking care of ourselves. It helps us stay healthy. It helps us work better. It balances life. We deserve tohave fun. Fun is a normal part of being alive. Fun is taking time to celebrate being alive.
We can schedule fun into our routine. We can learn to recognize when we need to play and what kinds of things we
enjoy doing. If we don't do this, we can make "learning to have fun" an immediate goal. Start doing things just forourselves, just because we want to. It might feel uncomfortable at first, but after a while it'll feel better. It'll become fun.
We can let ourselves enjoy life. If we want something and can afford it, buy it. If we want to do something that is legal
and harmless, do it. When we're actually involved with doing something that is recreational, don't find ways to feel bad.Let go and enjoy life. We can find things we
 
page_215
Page 216
enjoy doing, then let ourselves enjoy doing them. We can learn to relax and enjoy the things we do daily, not just the
recreational activities. Martyrdom can interfere with our ability to feel good long after the alcoholic has stopped helpingus feel miserable. Suffering can become habitual, but so can enjoying life and being good to ourselves. Try it.
Limits/Boundaries
Codependents, it has been said, have boundary problems. I agree. Most of us don't have boundaries.Boundaries are limits that say: "This is how far I shall go. This is what I will or won't do for you. This is what I won't
tolerate from you."
Most of us began relationships with boundaries. We had certain expectations, and we entertained certain ideas about
what we would or wouldn't tolerate from those people. Alcoholism and other compulsive disorders laugh in the face oflimits. The diseases not only push on our boundaries, they step boldly across them. Each time the disease pushes or stepsacross our limits we give in. We move our boundaries back, giving the disease more room to work. As the disease pushesmore, we give in more until we are tolerating things we said we would never tolerate and doing things we said we wouldnever do. 4 Later, this process of "increased tolerance" of inappropriate behaviors may reverse. We may become totallyintolerant of even the most human behaviors. In the beginning, we make excuses for a person's inappropriate behavior;toward the end, there is no excuse.
Not only do many of us begin tolerating abnormal, unhealthy, and inappropriate behaviors, we take it one step further:
we convince ourselves these behaviors are normal and what we deserve. We may become so familiar with verbal abuseand disrespectful treatment that we don't even recognize when these things are happening. But deep inside, an importantpart of us knows. Our selves  know and will tell us if we will listen. Sometimes living with subtle problems, such as a
nondrinking alcoholic who is not in any recovery program, can be harder on our selves than the more blatant problems.We sense something is wrong. We start
 
page_216
Page 217
feeling crazy, but we can't understand why because we can't identify the problem.
Codependents need boundaries. We need to set limits on what we shall do to and for people. We need to set limits on
what we will allow people to do to and for us. The people we relate to need to know we have boundaries. It will helpthem and us. I am not suggesting we become tyrants. I also advise against absolute inflexibility, but we can understandour limits. As we grow and change, we may want to change our boundaries too. Here are some examples of boundaries
common to codependents who are recovering:
· my life. I will not allow anyone to physically or verbally abuse me.
· I will not knowingly believe or support lies.
· I will not allow chemical abuse in my home.
· I will not allow criminal behavior in my home.
· I will not rescue people from the consequences of their alcohol abuse or other irresponsible behavior.
· I will not finance a person's alcoholism or other irresponsible behavior.
· I will not lie to protect you or me from your alcoholism.
· I will not use my home as a detoxification center for recovering alcoholics.
· If you want to act crazy that's your business, but you can't do it in front of me. Either you leave or I'll walk away.
· You can spoil your fun, your day, your lifethat's your business but I won't let you spoil my fun, my day, or
Sometimes it is necessary to set a certain boundary that applies to a particular relationship, such as, ''I won't baby-sit
Mary Lou's children anymore, because I don't want to and she takes advantage of me in that area.''
Set boundaries, but make sure they're our boundaries. The things we're sick of, can't stand, and make threats about, may
be clues to some boundaries we need to set. They may also be clues to changes we need to make within ourselves. Meanwhat we say, and say what we mean.
 
page_217
Page 218
People may get angry at us for setting boundaries; they can't use us anymore. They may try to help us feel guilty so we
will remove our boundary and return to the old system of letting them use or abuse you. Don't feel guilty and don't backdown. We can stick to our boundaries and enforce them. Be consistent. We will probably be tested more than once onevery boundary we set. People do that to see if we're serious, especially if we haven't meant what we said in the past. Ascodependents, we have made many empty threats. We lose our credibility, then wonder why people don't take usseriously. Tell people what our boundaries areonce, quietly, in peace. Watch our level of tolerance, so the pendulumdoesn't swing too far to either extreme.
Some codependents, particularly those of us in the latter stages of a relationship with an alcoholic, may find we have a
difficult time setting and enforcing limits with children, as well as with the troubled adults in our lives. Setting limitstakes time and thought; enforcing limits takes energy and consistency.
But boundaries are worth every bit of time, energy, and thought required to set and enforce them. Ultimately, they will
provide us with more time and energy.
What are our limits? What boundaries do we need to establish?
Physical Care
Sometimes in the latter stages of codependency, we codependents neglect our health and grooming. It's okay to look the
best we possibly can! We can get our hair styled or cut, for example. That's a normal part of living. We can dress in amanner that helps us feel good about ourselves. Look in the mirror; if we don't like what we see, fix it. If we can't fix it,we can stop hating ourselves and accept it.
Don't abandon the importance of exercise. If we're sick, go to a doctor. If we're overweight, figure out what we need to
do to take care of ourselves. The less we care for our bodies, the worse we will feel about ourselves. Sometimes, doinglittle things can help us feel a lot better. Get in touch with the physical parts of us. Listen to them. Give them what
 
page_218
Page 219
they need. Taking care of ourselves means taking care of our bodies and grooming. Make both a daily practice.
Taking care of our emotional selves is also connected to our bodies. The more we take care of our emotional selvesthe
more we get our needs metthe less we find ourselves sick. If we refuse long enough to take care of ourselves, our bodieswill rebel and become sick, forcing us and the people around us to give us the caretaking we need. It's easier to take careof ourselves before we get sick.
Professional Help
We need to seek professional help if:
· We are depressed and thinking about suicide.
· We want to do an intervention and confront an alcoholic or other troubled person.
· We have been the victim of physical or sexual abuse.
· We have been physically or sexually abusing somebody else.
· We are experiencing problems with alcohol or other drugs.
· We can't seem to solve our problems or get "unstuck" by ourselves.
· For any other reason, we believe we might benefit from professional help.
We can remember to trust ourselves when we go to professionals and pay attention to our feelings. If we are not
comfortable with the agency or person we're working with, if we don't agree with the direction the counseling is taking,or if we in any way don't trust the help we are receiving or not receiving, find another professional. We may beexperiencing a normal resistance to change, but it could be the person we're working with is not right for us. Not allprofessionals are able to work well with codependency, compulsive disorders, or chemical dependency.
One woman sought help from a private therapist because her daughter's chemical dependency and behavioral problems
were disrupting the family. The therapist pulled the whole family into counseling, then began devoting most of thesession time to trying to convince the parents that
 
page_219
Page 220
the reason the daughter was misbehaving was because the parents smoked cigarettes. The therapist had a prejudice
against smoking. The goal of therapy switched from "daughter behaving" to "Mom and Dad stopping smoking." Theparents were a little baffled and not entirely comfortable with the setup, but they were desperate for help. And theyassumed the therapist knew more than they did. After spending three months and $50 a week on this nonsense, theparents finally realized they were going nowhere and the trip was costing them a lot of money. I'm not saying it's notgood to stop smokingbut it was not the problem this family sought help for.
If we seek help and it doesn't seem right for us, seek different help. If we honestly make an effort to try something and it
doesn't work, try something else. We don't have to give up our power to think, feel, and make good decisions toanyoneincluding someone with a Ph.D. after his or her name.
We can get ourselves the best care possible.
Strokes
I'm not talking about heart problems; strokes is a Transactional Analysis term that caught on in therapy circles years ago.
Most of us need people. Most of us have at least a few relationships. When we are with these people, we can either
generate warm, loving feelings; no feeling; or cold, hostile feelings. We can say honest, tender, appreciative things, and
they can say those things back to us. We can lie, and people can lie back to us. We can talk about unimportant,
superficial stuff, and others can do the same. Or we can say nasty things, and they can respond in the same way. Most ofus do a little of all those things from time to time.
The idea is to strive for good relationships. If we don't have people to be honest, tender, loving, and appreciative with,
find some. If people say mean things to us, causing us to retaliate, stop retaliating and try to get the person to quit talkingthat way. If we can't get this person to change, find someone else to talk to. We need to be treated nicely. It helps usgrow, and it feels good.
 
page_220
Page 221
Strive for good physical treatment too. We don't ever have to let people hit us. And we don't have to hit people. Hug
them instead. Or, if a hug isn't appropriate, touch them in gentle, loving ways that communicate positive energy. Forthose who think hugging is a waste of time or an unnecessary activity indulged in by overly-sentimental people, read thefollowing excerpt from Fat Is a Family Affair and think again:
. . . In the early 1970s, doctors began studying a mechanism within the nervous system which produces amorphine-like effect helping to alleviate pain and subduing trauma and shock.
These morphine-like substances are called endorphins and they are secreted to soothe pain, take the edge off, andpromote general well-being. Some research indicates that overeaters and alcoholics produce fewer of theseendorphins than normal people. . . . Since you produce fewer endorphins, you often feel on a raw edge. Eatingsugar increases endorphin production, so when you eat, the rawness vanishes. . . .
If anorexic, you get the same kind of soothing from the "high" of not eating. That exuberant feeling comes fromthe endurance high of pushing yourself beyond your limits, much like the "runner's high" . . . there is analternative method to increased endorphin production. . . . It involves hugging. That's right, hugging. When youturn to a fellow human being and you put your arms around one another, this starts the endorphins flowing andthe raw edges are removed by the warmth of a loving friend. Your dog is no dummy when he jumps up for a rubon the chest or a pat on the head. He's getting his endorphins up and keeping himself mellow. 5
Codependents also frequently have difficulties accepting complimentspositive strokes. We can stop fighting the fact thatwe are good people with good qualities. If someone tells us something good about ourselves, we can accept it unlessinstinct tells us the person has ulterior motives. Even if he or she is trying to manipulate us, take the compliment andrefuse to be manipulated. Let it go all the way down to the heart and
 
page_221
Page 222
let the warm glow come. We deserve compliments. We need them. We all need them. They help us believe what we are
working so hard to believe: we are good people. The beauty of compliments is, the more good things we believe aboutourselves, the better we get.
We can also pass out compliments and spread around some positive energy. We can share what we like about people and
say what we appreciate in them. Make it honest, but make it good.
We can learn to recognize when we need to give a stroke. Learn to recognize when we need to be around people and get
some strokes. Choose friends that can give us the good stuff. Sometimes codependents get involved with friends who seethem as victims, helpless people who can't take care of themselves. These friends give sympathy, which is probablybetter than nothing, but it's not the same as strokes. Real love says, "You're having problems. I care, and I'll listen, but Iwon't and can't do it for you." Real friendship says, "I think so highly of you that I'll let you figure out how to do it foryourself. I know you can."
Trust
Codependents frequently aren't certain whom or when to trust. "Harvey's been in treatment for alcoholism two weeks.
He's lied to me 129 times. Now he's mad at me because I say I don't trust him. What should I do?"
I've repeatedly heard variations of this from codependents. My answer is usually the same: There's a difference between
trust and stupidity. Of course you don't trust Harvey. Quit trying to make yourself trust someone you don't trust.
Throughout the book I have repeated this phrase, and I will say it again: we can trust ourselves. We can trust ourselves to
make good decisions about whom to trust. Many of us have been making inappropriate decisions about trust. It is notwise to trust an alcoholic to never drink again if that alcoholic has not received treatment for the disease of alcoholism. Itis not even wise to trust an alcoholic never to drink again if he or she has received treatmentthere are no guarantees onhuman behav-
 
page_222
Page 223
ior. But we can trust people to be who they are. We can learn to see people clearly.
Figure out if people's words match their behaviors. Is what they say the same as what they do? As one woman puts it,
"He's looking real good, but he's not acting any better."
If we pay attention to ourselves and the messages we receive from the world, we will know whom to trust, when to trust,
and why to trust a particular person. We may discover we've always known whom to trustwe just weren't listening toourselves.
Sex
In one breath, a codependent will tell me her marriage is falling apart. In the next breath, she will ask if it's normal to
have sexual problems when things get that bad.
Yes, it's normal to have sexual problems. Many people have problems with sex. Many codependents experience sexual
problems. Alcoholism and the whole range of compulsive disorders attack all areas of intimacy. 6 Sometimes, thephysical expression of love is the last and final loss we sufferthe blow that tells us the problem won't go away, no matterhow long we close our eyes.
Sometimes the alcoholic has the problem. He becomes impotent, or she loses her sexual desire. This can happen both
before and after recovery. Frequently, it is the codependent who has problems with sex. There is a range of difficultiesthat can be encountered in the bedroom. We may be unable to achieve orgasm, fear loss of control, or lack trust in ourpartner. We may withdraw emotionally from our partner, be unwilling to be vulnerable with our partner, or lack desirefor our partner. We may feel revulsion toward our partner, or we don't get needs met because we're not asking to getthese needs met. The relationship probably isn't going to be much better in bed than it is outside the bedroom. If we'recaretaking in the kitchen, we'll probably be caretaking in the bedroom. If we're angry and hurt before we make love, we'llprobably feel angry and hurt after we make love. If we don't want to be in the relationship,
 
page_223
Page 224
we won't want to have sex with that person. The sexual relationship will echo and reflect the overall tone of the
relationship.
Sexual problems can sneak up on people. For a while, sex can be the salvation of a troubled relationship. Sex can be a
way of making up after an argument. Talking seems to clear the air, and sex makes it all better. After a certain point,though, talking may no longer clear the air. Talking just fogs it up more, and sex stops making it better. Instead, sex canmake things worse.
For some, sex may become a purely clinical act that provides approximately the same emotional satisfaction as brushing
one's teeth. For others, it can become a time of humiliation and degradation: another chore, another duty, something elsewe should do but don't want to. It becomes one more area that isn't working, that we feel guilty and ashamed about, that
we try to lie to ourselves about. We have one more area in our lives that causes us to wonder, "What's wrong with me?"
I am not a sex therapist. I have no cures or technical advicejust some common sense. I believe taking care of ourselves
means we apply the same principles in the bedroom as we do in any other area of our lives. First, we stop blaming andhating ourselves.
Once we understand that, we get honest with ourselves. We stop running, hiding, and denying. We gently ask ourselves
what we are feeling and thinking, then we trust our answers. We respectfully listen to ourselves. We don't abuse andpunish ourselves. We understand the problem we are experiencing is a normal response to the system we have beenliving in. Of course we're having that problemit's a normal part of the process. It would be abnormal to not feel revulsion,withdrawal, lack of trust, or other negative feelings. There's nothing wrong with us.
After we have sorted things out, we get honest with our partner. We tell him or her what we are thinking and feeling, and
what we need from him or her. We explore possibilities, negotiating and compromising when appropriate. If we cannotsolve our problems by ourselves, we seek professional help.
Some of us may have sought comfort in extramarital affairs. We need to forgive ourselves and figure out what we need
to do to take care of
 
page_224
Page 225
ourselves. Take the Fourth and Fifth Steps; talk to a clergyperson. We can try to understand our actions were common
reactions to the problems we have been living with.
Some of us may be trying to run from our problems by having a series of unsatisfactory sexual relationships. That
frequently occurs during the denial stage, when compulsive behaviors tend to set in. We don't have to continue doingthat. We can face and solve our problems in other ways. We can forgive ourselves and quit hurting ourselves.
Some of us may be looking for love and coming up with sex instead. Understand what we need and figure out how to
best meet our needs.
Some of us may need to start asking for what we need. Others may need to learn to say no. Some of us may be trying to
force love back into a dead relationship by trying to force sexual enjoyment. That technique may not work. Sex isn't love;it is sex. It doesn't make love exist if the love wasn't there to start with. Sex can only express the love that already exists.
Some of us may have given up and decided sex isn't that important. I happen to believe sex is important. It's not the most
important thing in life, but it's an important part of my life.
Sex is a powerful force, a great source for intimacy and for pleasure. We can take care of ourselves if our sex life isn't
working the way we would like it to. We are responsible for our sexual behaviorfor our enjoyment or lack of pleasure inbed. We can ask ourselves, what are our sex lives telling us about our relationships?
 
page_225
Page 227
20
Learning to Live and Love Again
At least I don't run around actively seeking my own demise any more. Al-Anon member
Originally I planned to separate the material in this chapter into two chapters: Learning to Live Again and Learning to
Love Again. However, I decided separately addressing living and loving was not the issue. The problem manycodependents encounter is learning to do both at the same time.
According to Earnie Larsen and others, the two deepest desires most people have are: to love and be loved, and to
believe they are worthwhile and know someone else believes that also. 1 I have also heard this phrased more simply, with
one item added: To be happy we need someone to love, something to do, and something to look forward to.
I am not going to split hairs over whether those desires are needs or wants. I think they're important. Whether we have
been aware of these desires or not, they probably have been driving forces in our lives. Most of us have been trying, onsome level of consciousness, to meet these needs. To protect ourselves, some of us may have blocked or shut off theseneeds. They are still there, whether we acknowledge or repress them. Understanding ourselves and our desires ispowerful information. What we, as codependents, need to learn to do is fulfill these desires, needs, and wants in waysthat don't hurt ourselves or other people, in ways that allow maximum enjoyment of life.
 
page_227
Page 228
For many of us, that means we need to do things differently, because the ways we have gone about getting our needs met
haven't worked. We've talked about some concepts that will help us do that: detachment, a nonrescuing approach topeople, not controlling the object of our attention, directness, paying attention to ourselves, working a Twelve Stepprogram, and becoming undependent. I believe as we get healthier, love will be different. I believe love will be better,perhaps better than ever before, if we let it and if we insist on it.
I don't think love has to hurt as much as it did in the past. I don't think we have to allow love to hurt us as much as it has.
We certainly don't have to let it destroy us. As one woman so aptly phrases it, ''I'm sick of being addicted to pain. I'msick of being addicted to suffering. And I'm sick of letting men work out their unfinished business in my life!'' It's notGod's will that we stay miserable and stay in miserable relationships. That's something we've been doing to ourselves.We don't have to stay in relationships that cause us pain and misery. We are free to take care of ourselves.
We can learn to recognize the difference between relationships that do and don't work. We can learn to leave destructive
relationships and enjoy the good ones. We can learn new behaviors that will help our good relationships work better.
I believe God allows certain people to come into our lives. But I also believe we are responsible for our choices and
behaviors in initiating, maintaining, and discontinuing these relationships when appropriate. We may want and need love,but we don't need destructive love. And when we believe that, our message will come across clearly.
I believe our professional lives can be different and better. We can learn to take care of ourselves and our needs on the
job. And if we are not so absorbed in other people and their business, if we believe we are important, we are free to setour own goals and reach our dreams. We are able to capture a vision for our own lives. That's exciting because goodthings can, do, and will happen to us if we allow those things to happen and if we are open to and believe we deservethose things. The good things probably won't happen without some struggle and pain, but
 
page_228
Page 229
at least we will be struggling and stretching for something worthwhile, instead of simply suffering.
It's okay to succeed, to have good things, and to have loving relationships that work. These things may not come easily
or naturally. We may struggle and kick and want to hide our heads in the sand along the way. That's okay. That's howgrowth feels. If it feels too comfortable, too natural, or too easy, we're not growing and we're not doing anythingdifferent. We're doing the same things we always have, and that's why it feels so comfortable.
Learning to live and love again means finding a balance: learning to love and, at the same time, living our own lives;
learning to love without getting so emotionally entangled with the object of our affection; and learning to love otherswithout forfeiting love for ourselves. We need to learn to live, love, and have fun so each activity does not unreasonablyinterfere with any of the others.
Much of recovery is finding and maintaining balance in all areas of our lives. We need to watch the scales so they do not
tip too far to either side as we measure our responsibilities to ourselves and to others. We need to balance our emotionalneeds with our physical, mental, and spiritual needs. We need to balance giving and receiving; we need to find the
dividing line between letting go and doing our part. We need to find a balance between solving problems and learning to
live with unsolved problems. Much of our anguish comes from having to live with the grief of unsolved problems, and
having things not go the way we hoped and expected. We need to find a balance between letting go of our expectationsand remembering we are important, valuable people who deserve to lead decent lives.
Getting Started
Frequently I am asked, where do I start? How do I get started? How do I even get my balance?I've discussed many suggestions and ideas in this book, and some of us may feel overwhelmed.
 
page_229
Page 230
For some of us, getting our balance may seem impossible. We may feel like we are lying flat on the floor of a dark cellar,
and we cannot possibly crawl out. We can. Alcoholics Anonymous and Al-Anon offer a simple three-part formula fordoing this. It's called "HOW": Honesty, Openness, and Willingness to try. Earlier, I wrote change begins with awarenessand acceptance. The third step in changing human behavior is assertive action. 2 For us that means doing thingsdifferently. Get honest, keep an open mind, and become willing to try to do things differently, and we will change.
Choose one behavior to work on and when that becomes comfortable go on to another item. I have heard we need to
repeat an action 21 times to make it a habit. That's a rule of thumb to keep in mind. The checklist in Chapter Four mayprovide some clues about where to start. The activities at the end of the chapters may give us some ideas. Figure outwhere we want to start and begin there. Start where we're at. If we can't figure out where to start, start by going to Al-Anon meetings, or another appropriate group. If we're in the basement, start crawling out. We'll learn to walk; we'll getour balance.
Getting started is both difficult and fun. When I began my recovery from codependency, I felt hopelessly trapped in
myself and my relationships. Gloom surrounded me, and depression seemed to have permanently confined me to my bed.One morning, unhappy about being alive and awake, I dragged myself into the bathroom to get dressed and comb myhair, when my son insisted I follow him to another part of the house. I discovered a raging fire was consuming mybedroom. It had spread to the curtains, the ceiling, and the carpet. As in the past, I thought I could handle things myself; Ithought the fire was not the disaster it appeared to be, so I grabbed a fire extinguisher and emptied it on the flames. Toolittle, too late. The fire raged on as we left the house.
My house was gutted by the time the fire department arrived. It was two weeks before Christmas, and my family and I
had to move into a small apartment minus most of our clothing and the most basic of comforts. I hit my peak ofdespondency and anxiety. I had already lost so much, including myself. My home had been my nest, my remaining
 
page_230
Page 231
source of emotional security, and now I had lost that too. I had lost everything.
As the weeks passed, life began to require a little activity from me. Insurance inventories, negotiations, cleanup, and
rebuilding plans demanded my attention. I felt anxious and insecure, but I had no choice. I had to think. I had to getbusy. I had to do certain things. Once the actual reconstruction began, I had to do even more. I made choices about howto spend thousands of dollars. I worked hand in hand with the crews, doing everything I was able to do to help cut costsand expedite the project. That included physical activity, a part of my life that had become nonexistent. The busier I got,the better I felt. I began to trust my decisions. I worked off lots of anger and fear. By the time my family and I movedback into our home, my balance had been restored. I had begun living my own life, and I wasn't going to stop. It feltgood!
The important concept here is, get started. Light a fire under yourself.
Growing Forward
Once we have gotten started, moving forward will become a natural process, if we continue to move. Sometimes, we will
take a few steps backward. That's okay too. Sometimes it's necessary. Sometimes it's part of going forward.
Some of us may be facing tough decisions, decisions about ending relationships that are miserable and destructive.
According to Earnie Larsen, if the relationship is dead, bury it. We can take our time, work on ourselves, and we will beable to make the right decision when the time is right.
Some of us may be trying to repair damaged but still alive relationships. Be patient. Love and trust are fragile, living
entities. They do not automatically regenerate upon command if they have been bruised. Love and trust do notautomatically reappear if the other person gets sober or solves whatever problem he or she had. 3 Love and trust must beallowed to heal in their own time. Sometimes they heal; sometimes they don't.
 
page_231
Page 232
Some of us may be without a special person to love. That can be difficult, but it is not an impossible situation. We may
want and need someone to love, but I think it helps if we love ourselves enough. It's okay to be in a relationship, but it'salso okay to not be in a relationship. Find friends to love, be loved by, and who think we are worthwhile. Love ourselvesand know we are worthwhile. Use our time alone as a breather. Let go. Learn the lessons we are to be learning. Grow.Develop. Work on ourselves, so when love comes along, it enhances a full and interesting life. Love shouldn't be theconcern of our whole life or an escape from an unpleasant life. Strive toward goals. Have fun. Trust God and His timing.He cares and knows about all our needs and wants.
Whatever our situation, we can go slowly. Our hearts may lead us where our heads say we shouldn't go. Our heads may
insist we go where our hearts don't want to follow. Sometimes our attraction to frogs may take us where neither ourhearts nor heads choose to be. That's okay. There are no rules about whom we should or shouldn't love and relate to. Wecan love whomever we love, however we want to. But slow down and take the time to do it in a way that doesn't hurt us.Pay attention to what's happening. Love from our strengths, not from our weaknesses, and ask others to do the same.Make good decisions each day about what we need to do to take care of ourselves. Between our Higher Power andourselves, we will be able to figure out what to do. I hope we will find people we enjoy lovingpeople who enjoy lovingus and challenge us to grow. I hope we find enjoyable work that challenges us to grow.
A word of caution. From time to time, we may lose our balance. We may start running, skipping, and jumping, then
suddenly find ourselves with our noses on the cement. All the old crazy feelings come rushing in. Don't be frightened.This is normal. Codependent characteristics, ways of thinking, and feelings become habits. Those habitual feelings andthoughts may surface on occasion. Change (even good change), certain circumstances reminiscent of alcoholic insanity,and stress, may provoke codependency. Sometimes the craziness returns unprovoked. See it through. Don't be ashamedand don't hide. We can pick ourselves up again. We will get through it. Talk to trusted friends; be patient and
 
page_232
Page 233
gentle with ourselves. Just keep doing the things we know we need to do. It will get better. Don't stop taking care of us
no matter what happens.
Getting our balance and keeping it once we have found it is what recovery is all about. If that sounds like a big order,
don't worry. We can do it. We can learn to live again. We can learn to love again. We can even learn to have fun at thesame time.
 
page_233
Page 235
EPILOGUE

I am not a teacher, but an awakener. 
Robert Frost
I wanted to write this book many years before I began it.Originally, I wanted to write a book about codependency because when I was in so much pain with my codependency, I
couldn't find a book that explained what had happened. I wanted to write a book for other hurting people that wouldexplain codependency, help them understand, and ease their pain.-
That motive got squelched when I was "beaten to the punch." Other people began writing about codependency. Also,
some literature had been available; I just hadn't found it.
Later, my motive for writing this book changed. I not only wanted to ease other people's pain; I wanted to redeem my
suffering. It was a bargain I was trying to strike on my somewhat extended path to acceptance: If I write a book aboutthis, then that part of my life won't be such a loss.
That motive was squelched too. Before I wrote the book, I accepted what had happened to me. It was okay, whether I did
or didn't write about it. I also realized I had gained more than I had lost. Through my experience with codependency, Ifound my self. Everything from our
 
page_235
Page 236
pasts has prepared and propelled us to this moment; today prepares us for tomorrow. And it all works out for the good.
Nothing's wasted.
By the time I actually sat down to write this book, my motive was about the same as it had been originally. I wanted to
write something that would help codependent people, and I thought I had a few worthwhile ideas to pass along. However,this book is just an opinion, and my thoughts and ideas are just thatthoughts and ideas. To illustrate this point, let mequote Garrison Keillor. He was discussing fiction, but his statement applies to nonfiction, self-help books, as well:
"It's tough to tell the truth especially when . . . we're not absolutely sure of the truth. You're looking for the truth, and you
are just putting out some markers." 1
I hope this book has marked some truth for you. I hope I have helped awaken you to your self.
 
page_236
Page 237
NOTES
Introduction
1. Janet Geringer Woititz, "Co-Dependency: The Insidious Invader of Intimacy," in Co-Dependency, An Emerging Issue
(Hollywood, FL Health Communications, 1984), 59.
2. Toby Rice Drews, Getting Them Sober (South Plainfield, NJ: Bridge Publishing, 1980), vol. 1, xv.
Chapter 3
1. Paraphrase based on a quote by Joan Wexler and John Steidll (teachers of psychiatric social work at Yale University),
quoted by Colette Dowling, The Cinderella Complex: Women's Hidden Fear of Independence (New York: Pocket Books,1981), 145.
2. Robert Subby, "Inside the Chemically Dependent Marriage: Denial and Manipulation," in Co-Dependency, An
Emerging Issue (Hollywood, FL Health Communications, 1984), 26.
3. Robert Subby and John Friel, "Co-Dependency: A Paradoxical Dependency," in Co-Dependency, An Emerging Issue,
31.
4. Al-Anon Family Group, Al-Anon Faces Alcoholism (New York: Al-Anon Family Group Headquarters, 1977).5. Al-Anon protects the anonymity of its members and keeps no official record of membership data. However, the
Minneapolis Intergroup office agreed this figure was probably accurate.
6. Terence T. Gorski and Merlene Miller, "Co-Alcoholic Relapse: Family Factors and Warning Signs," in Co-
Dependency, An Emerging Issue, 78.
 
page_237
Page 238
7. Earnie Larsen; Subby, "Inside the Chemically Dependent Marriage."
8. Subby and Friel, "Co-Dependency."9. Charles L Whitfield, "Co-Dependency: An Emerging Problem Among Professionals," in Co-Dependency, An
Emerging Issue, 53; Joseph L Kellermann, The Family and Alcoholism:  A Move from Pathology to Process (Center City,
MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1984).
10. Wayne W. Dyer, Your Erroneous  Zones (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1976); Theodore I. Rubin with Eleanor
Rubin, Compassion and Self-Hate: An Alternative to Despair (New York: David McKay Company, 1975).
Chapter 4
1. Nathaniel Branden, Honoring the Self: Personal Integrity and the Heroic Potentials of Human Nature (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company, 1983), 162.
2. Dennis Wholey, The Courage to Change (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1984), 207.3. Judi Hollis, Fat Is a Family Affair  (San Francisco: Harper/Hazelden, 1986), 55.
4. Ibid.,  53.
5. Robert Subby and John Friel, "Co-Dependency: A Paradoxical Dependency," in Co-Dependency, An Emerging Issue
(Hollywood, FL: Health Communications, 1984), 32.
Chapter 5
1. This quote is excerpted from a handout entitled "Detachment," which contains a collection of writings by anonymousAl-Anon members.
2. Wayne W. Dyer, Your Erroneous Zones (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1976), 89.3. Al-Anon Family Group, One Day at a Time in Al-Anon (New York: Al-Anon Family Group Headquarters, Inc., 1976).4. Judi Hollis, Fat Is a Family Affair  (San Francisco: Harper/Hazelden, 1986), 47.
5. Terence Williams, Free to Care: Therapy for the Whole Family  (Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials,
1975).6. Hollis, at Is a Family Affair.
 
page_238
Page 239
7. Carolyn W, Detaching with Love (Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1984), 5.
8. Lois Walfrid Johnson, Either Way, I Win: A Guide to Growth in the Power of Prayer (Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1979).
9. Earnie Larsen does a similar meditation exercise at the end of his seminars.
Chapter 6
1. William Backus and Marie Chapian, Telling Yourself the Truth (Minneapolis: Bethany Fellowship, 1980).
Chapter 7
1. Eda LeShan, ''Beware the Helpless,'' Woman's Day, 26 April 1983.
Chapter 8
1. Claude M. Steiner, Scripts People Live (New York: Grove Press, 1974).2. Ibid.; Claude M. Steiner, Games Alcoholics Play (New York: Grove Press, 1971); and Claude M. Steiner, What Do
You Say After You Say Hello? (New York: Grove Press, 1972).
Chapter 9
1. Penelope Russianoff, Why Do I Think I'm Nothing Without a Man? (New York: Bantam Books, 1982); Theodore I.Rubin with Eleanor Rubin, Compassion and Self-Hate: An  Alternative to Despair  (New York: David McKay Company,
1975), 278.
2. Janet Geringer Woititz, "Co-Dependency: The Insidious Invader of Intimacy," in Co-Dependency, An Emerging Issue
(Hollywood, FL Health Communications, 1984), 56.
3. Rubin, Compassion, 196.4. Colette Dowling, The Cinderella Complex: Women's Hidden Fear of Independence (New York: Pocket Books, 1981).5. Ibid., 152-53.6. Ibid.7. Russianoff, Why Do I Think I'm Nothing.
 
page_239
Page 240
8. Dowling, The Cinderella Complex, 22.9. Kathy Capell-Sowder, "On Being Addicted to the Addict: Co-Dependent Relationships," in Co-Dependency, 23. See
also Stanton Peele and Archie Brodsky, Love and Addiction (New York: New American Library, 1975).
Chapter 10
1. Nathaniel Branden, Honoring the Self: Personal Integrity and the Heroic Potentials of Human Nature (Boston:Houghton Mifflin Company, 1983), 53.
2. Theodore I. Rubin with Eleanor Rubin, Compassion  and Self-Hate: An Alternative to Despair (New York: David
McKay Company, 1975), 65.3. Ibid.
Chapter 11
1. Theodore 1. Rubin with Eleanor Rubin, Compassion and Self-Hate: An Alternative to Despair (New York: David
McKay Company, 1975); Nathaniel Branden, Honoring the Self: Personal Integrity and the Heroic Potentials of Human
Nature (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1983).
2. Robert Subby and John Friel, "Co-Dependency: A Paradoxical Dependency," in Co-Dependency, An Emerging Issue
(Hollywood, FL: Health Communications, 1984), 40.
3. Rubin, Compassion.4. Ibid.5. Branden, Honoring the Self.6. Ibid., 76.7. Wayne W. Dyer, Your Erroneous Zones (New  York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1976).
8. Toby Rice Drews, Getting Them Sober (South Plainfield, NJ: Bridge Publishing, 1980), vol. 1, xxi.9. Branden, Honoring the Self, 1-4.
Chapter 12
1. Joseph L. Kellermann, A Guide for the Family of the Alcoholic (New York: Al-Anon Family Group Headquarters,
1984), 8-9.
 
page_240
Page 241
2. Janet Geringer Woititz, "Co-Dependency: The Insidious Invader of Intimacy," in Co-Dependency, An Emerging Issue(Hollywood, FL Health Communications, 1984), 55.
3. Ibid.,  59.
4. Harold A. Swift and Terence Williams, Recovery for the Whole Family (Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational
Materials, 1975).
5. Nathaniel Branden, Honoring the Self: Personal Integrity and the Heroic Potentials of Human Nature (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company, 1983), 62-65.
6. Elisabeth Kübler-Ross, On Death and Dying (New York: MacMillan Publishing, 1969).7. Melody Beattie, Denial (Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1986).8. Claudia L. Jewett, Helping Children Cope with Separation and Loss (Harvard, MA: The Harvard Common Press,
1982), 29.
9. Ibid., 23, 29.10. John Powell, Why Am I Afraid to Tell You Who I Am? (Allen, TX: Argus Communications, 1969), 116-17.11. Kübler-Ross, On Death and Dying, 99-100.12. Judi Hollis, Fat Is a Family Affair (San Francisco: Harper/Hazelden, 1986), 80.13. Donald L Anderson, Better Than Blessed (Wheaton, IL: Tyndale House Publishers, 1981), 11.
Chapter 13
1. John Powell, Why Am I Afraid to Tell You Who I Am? (Allen, TX: Argus Communications, 1969), 155.2. Jael Greenleaf, "Co-Alcoholic/Para-Alcoholic: Who's Who and What's the Difference?" in Co-Dependency, An
Emerging Issue (Hollywood, FL Health Communications, 1984), 9.
3. Scott Egleston; Powell, Why Am I Afraid; Toby Rice Drews, Getting Them Sober (South Plainfield, NJ: Bridge
Publishing, 1980), vol. 1.
4. Nathaniel Branden, Honoring the Self: Personal Integrity and the Heroic Potentials of Human Nature (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company, 1983).
5. Powell, Why Am I Afraid.
 
page_241
Page 242
6. Ibid.7. Albert Ellis and Robert A. Harper, A New Guide to Rational Living (Hollywood, CA: Wilshire Book, 1975); William
Backus and Marie Chapian, Telling Yourself the Truth  (Minneapolis: Bethany Fellowship, 1980).
Chapter 14
1. Janet Geringer Woititz, "The Co-Dependent Spouse: What Happens to You When Your Husband Is an Alcoholic," inCo-Dependency, An Emerging Issue  (Hollywood, FL Health Communications, 1984), 90.
2. Gayle Rosellini and Mark Worden, Of Course You're Angry (San Francisco: Harper/Hazelden, 1986).
3. Ephesians 4:26 RSV.4. Toby Rice Drews, Getting Them Sober (South Plainfield, NJ: Bridge Publishing, 1980), vol. 1; Rosellini and Worden,
Of Course You're Angry; and Scott Egleston.
5. Frederick S. Perls, Gestalt Therapy  Verbatim (New York: Bantam Books, 1969).
6. Claude M. Steiner, Scripts People Live (New York: Grove Press, 1979).7. Rosellini and Worden, Of Course You're Angry.8. Woititz, "The Co-Dependent Spouse," 83.
Chapter 15
1. 2 Timothy 1:7 New Scofield Reference Bible.2. Aron Kahn, "Indecision Decidedly in Vogue," St. Paul Pioneer Press and Dispatch (1 April 1986, sec. C).3. Toby Rice Drews, Getting Them  Sober (South Plainfield, NJ: Bridge Publishing, 1980), vol. 1.
4. Paraphrase of material in Alcoholics Anonymous , 3d ed. "The Big Book" (New York: Alcoholics Anonymous World
Services, 1976).
Chapter 16
1. David J. Schwartz, The Magic of Thinking Big  (New York: Cornerstone Library, 1959), 162-63.
 
page_242
Page 243
2. Ibid., 163-64.3. Ibid., 164.
4. Dennis Wholey, The Courage to Change (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1984), 39.
Chapter 17
1. Toby Rice Drews, Getting Them Sober (South Plainfield, NJ: Bridge Publishing, 1980), vol. 1, 77-78.
2. Ibid., 76.3. John Powell, Why Am I Afraid to Tell You Who I Am? (Allen, TX: Argus Communications, 1969), 12.4. Ibid., 8.5. Jean Baer, How to Be an Assertive (Not Aggressive) Woman in Life, in Love, and on the Job (New York: New
American Library, 1976).
Chapter 18
1. Al-Anon Family Group, Al-Anon's Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions (New York: Al-Anon Family GroupHeadquarters, 1981), 131.
2. Jael Greenleaf, "Co-Alcoholic/Para-Alcoholic: Who's Who and What's the Difference?" in Co-Dependency, An
Emerging Issue (Hollywood, FL Health Communications, 1984), 15.
3. George E. Vaillant, The Natural History of Alcoholism (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1983).4. Warren W. told this story in Minneapolis 23 August 1985, borrowing it from circuit speaker Clancy Imislund who
operates the Midnight Mission and lives in Venice, CA.
5. Al-Anon Family Group, Al-Anon: Is It for You? (New York: Al-Anon Family Group Headquarters, 1983). Reprinted
by permission of Al-Anon Family Group Headquarters, Inc.
6. Judi Hollis, Fat Is a Family Affair (San Francisco: Harper/Hazelden, 1986), 49-52.
 
page_243
Page 244
Chapter 19
1. Paraphrased quote based on a greeting card and poster sold years ago; author is unknown.2. Toby Rice Drews, Getting Them Sober  (South Plainfield, NJ: Bridge Publishing, 1983), vol. 2, 52.
3. Penelope Russianoff, Why Do I Think I'm Nothing Without a Man? (New York: Bantam Books, 1982).4. Kathy Capell-Sowder, "On Being Addicted to the Addict: Co-Dependent Relationships," in Co-Dependency, An
Emerging Issue (Hollywood, FL: Health Communications, 1984), 20-21.
5. Judi Hollis, Fat  Is a Family Affair (San Francisco: Harper/Hazelden, 1986), 30-31.
6. Ideas discussed in this section are drawn from several articles in Co-Dependency, An  Emerging Issue  (Hollywood, FL:
Health Communications, 1984); Janet Geringer Woititz, "The Co-Dependent Spouse: What Happens to You When Your
Husband Is an Alcoholic"; Gerald Shulman, "Sexuality and Recovery: Impact on the Recovering Couple"; MarilynMason, ''Bodies and Beings: Sexuality Issues During Recovery for the Dependent and Co-Dependent"; and JanetGeringer Woititz, "Co-Dependency: The Insidious Invader of Intimacy."
Chapter 20
1. Abraham H. Maslow, ed., Motivation and Personality, 2d ed. (New York: Harper & Row, 1970); Benjamin Wolman,ed., International Encyclopedia of Psychiatry, Psychology, Psychoanalysis, & Neurology (New York: AesculapiusPublishers, 1977), vol. 7, 32-33.
2. Nathaniel Branden, Honoring the Self: Personal Integrity and the Heroic Potentials of Human Nature (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company, 1983), 162.
3. Janet Geringer Woititz, "Co-Dependency: The Insidious Invader of Intimacy," in Co-Dependency, An Emerging Issue
(Hollywood, FL: Health Communications, 1984), 59.
Epilogue
1. Michael Schumacher, "Sharing the Laughter with Garrison Keillor," Writer's Digest  (January 1986), 33.
 
page_244
Page 245
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Books:
Alcoholics Anonymous World Services. Alcoholics Anonymous " The Big Book" 3d ed. New York: Alcoholics
Anonymous World Services, 1976.
Al-Anon Family Group. Al-Anon: Is It for You? New York: Al-Anon Family Group Headquarters, 1983.. Al-Anon's Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions New York: Al-Anon Family Group Headquarters, 1981.. Al-Anon Faces Alcoholism New York: Al-Anon Family Group Headquarters, 1977.. One Day at a Time in Al-Anon New York: Al-Anon Family Group Headquarters, 1974.. The Dilemma of the Alcoholic Marriage New York: Al-Anon Family Group Headquarters, 1971.Anderson, Donald L Better Than Blessed Wheaton, IL Tyndale House Publishers, 1981.Backus, William, and Marie Chapian. Telling Yourself the Truth Minneapolis: Bethany Fellowship, 1980.Baer, Jean. How to Be an Assertive (Not Aggressive) Woman in Life, in Love, and on the Job New York: New American
Library, 1976.
Branden, Nathaniel. Honoring the Self: Personal Integrity and the Heroic Potentials of Human Nature Boston: Houghton
Mifflin Company, 1983.
DeRosis, Helen A., and Victoria Y. Pellegrino. The Book of Hope: How Women Can Overcome Depression New York:
MacMillan Publishing, 1976.
 
page_245
Page 246
Dowling, Colette. The Cinderella  Complex : Women's  Hidden Fear of Independence New York: Pocket Books, 1981.
Drews, Toby Rice. Getting Them Sober, Volume I South Plainfield, NJ: Bridge Publishing, 1980.
. Getting Them  Sober, Volume 2 South Plainfield, NJ: Bridge Publishing, 1983.
Dyer, Wayne W. Your Erroneous Zones New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1976.Ellis, Albert, and Robert A. Harper. A New Guide to Rational Living Hollywood, CA: Wilshire Books, 1975.Fort, Joel. The Addicted Society: Pleasure-Seeking and Punishment Revisited New York: Grove Press, 1981.
Hafen, Brent Q., with Kathryn J. Frandsen. The Crisis  Intervention Handbook Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1982.
Hazelden. Day by Day  San Francisco: Harper/Hazelden, 1986.
. Twenty-Four Hours  a Day San Francisco: Harper/Hazelden, 1985.
Health Communications. Co-Dependency, An Emerging Issue  Hollywood, FL Health Communications, 1984.
Hollis, Judi. Fat Is a Family Affair  San Francisco: Harper/Hazelden, 1986.
Hornik-Beer, Edith Lynn. A Teenager's Guide to Living with an Alcoholic Parent Center City, MN: Hazelden
Educational Materials, 1984.
Jewett, Claudia L Helping Children Cope with Separation and Loss Harvard, MA: The Harvard Common Press, 1982.Johnson, Lois Walfrid. Either Way, I Win:  A Guide to Growth in  the Power of Prayer Minneapolis: Augsburg Publishing
House, 1979.Kimball, Bonnie-Jean. The Alcoholic Woman's Mad, Mad World of Denial and Mind Games  Center City, MN: Hazelden
Educational Materials, 1978.Kübler-Ross, Elisabeth. On Death and Dying New York: MacMillan Publishing. 1969.Landorf, Joyce. Irregular  People Waco, TX: Word, 1982.
Lee, Wayne. Formulating and Reaching Goals Champaign, IL Research Press Company, 1978.Maslow, Abraham H., ed. Motivation and Personality 2d ed. New York: Harper & Row, 1970.
 
page_246
Page 247
Maxwell, Ruth. The Booze Battle New York: Ballantine Books, 1976.McCabe, Thomas R. Victims No  More Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1978.
Perls, Frederick S. Gestalt Therapy Verbatim New York: Bantam Books, 1969.Pickens, Roy W, and Dace S. Svikis. Alcoholic Family Disorders: More Than Statistics Center City, MN: Hazelden
Educational Materials, 1985.
Powell, John S. Why Am I Afraid to Tell You Who I Am? Allen, TX: Argus Communications, 1969.Restak, Richard M. The Self Seekers Garden City, NY: Doubleday and Company, 1982.Rosellini, Gayle, and Mark Worden. Of Course You're Angry San Francisco: Harper/Hazelden, 1986.Rubin, Theodore I. Reconciliations: Inner Peace in an Age of Anxiety New York: The Viking Press, 1980.Rubin, Theodore I., with Eleanor Rubin. Compassion and Self-Hate: An Alternative to Despair New York: David
McKay Company, 1975.
Russianoff, Penelope. Why Do I Think I Am Nothing Without a Man? New York: Bantam Books, 1982.Schwartz, David J. The Magic of Thinking Big  New York: Cornerstone Library, 1959.
Steiner, Claude M. Games Alcoholics Play: The Analysis of Life Scripts New York: Grove Press, 1971.. Healing  Alcoholism New York: Grove Press, 1979.
. Scripts People Live  New York: Grove Press, 1974.
. What Do You Say After You Say Hello? New York: Grove Press, 1972.
Vaillant, George E. The Natural History of Alcoholism: Causes, Patterns and Paths to Recovery Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1982.
Vine, Phyllis. Families in Pain: Children, Siblings, Spouses and Parents of the Mentally Ill Speak Out New York:
Pantheon Books, 1982.
Wallis, Charles L, ed. The Treasure Chest New York: Harper & Row, 1965.Wholey, Dennis. The Courage to Change Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1984.
 
page_247
Page 248
Woititz, Janet Geringer. Adult Children of Alcoholics  Hollywood, FL Health Communications, 1983.
Wolman, Benjamin B., ed. International Encyclopedia of Psychiatry, Psychology, Psychoanalysis & Neurology,  vol. 7
New York: Aesculapius Publishers, 1977.York, Phyllis and David, and Ted Wachtel. Tough love Garden City, NY: Doubleday and Company, 1982.
Pamphlets:
Beattie, Melody. Denial  Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1986.
Burgin, James E. Help for the Marriage Partner of an Alcoholic Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials,
1976.
Emotions Anonymous International Services. The Enormity of Emotional illness: The Hope Emotions Anonymous Has to
Offer St. Paul, MN: Emotions Anonymous International Services, 1973.
H., Barbara. Untying the Knots: One Parent's View Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1984.Harrison, Earl. Boozlebane on Alcoholism and the Family Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1984.Hazelden Educational Materials. Teen Drug Use: What Can Parents Do? Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational
Materials. (Reprinted with permission of Department of Public Instruction, Bismarck, ND, Drug Abuse Education Act of1970.)
. No Substitute for Love: Ideas for Family Living Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials. (Reprinted with
permission of Special Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention, Executive Office of the President, Washington, DC, in
conjunction with the Drug Abuse Prevention Week in 1973.)
. Step Four: Guide to Fourth Step Inventory for the Spouse Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1976.. Learn about Families and Chemical Dependency Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1985.Kellermann, Joseph L The Family and Alcoholism: A Move from Pathology to Process Center City, MN: Hazelden
Educational Materials, 1984.
. A Guide for the Family of the Alcoholic New York: Al-Anon Family Group Headquarters, 1984.
 
page_248
Page 249
Nakken, Jane. Enabling Change: When Your Child Returns Home from Treatment Center City, MN: Hazelden
Educational Materials, 1985.
Schroeder, Melvin. Hope for Relationships  Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1980.
Scientific Affairs Committee of the Bay Area Physicians for Human Rights. Guidelines for AIDS Risk  Reduction San
Francisco: The San Francisco AIDS Foundation, 1984.
Swift, Harold A., and Terence Williams Recovery for the Whole Family Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational
Materials, 1975.
Timmerman, Nancy G. Step One for Family and Friends Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1985.. Step Two for Family and Friends Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1985.W, Carolyn. Detaching with Love Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1984.Williams, Terence. Free to Care: Therapy for the Whole Family of Concerned Persons Center City, MN: Hazelden
Educational Materials, 1975.
Articles:
Anderson, Eileen. ''When Therapists Are Hooked on Power" The Phoenix, vol. 5, no. 7, July 1985.
"Author's Study Says CoAs Can't Identify Their Needs" The Phoenix  (from Family Focus, published by the U.S. Journal
of Drug and Alcohol Dependence), vol. 4, no. 11, November 1984.Bartell, Jim. "Family Illness Needs Family Treatment, Experts Say" The Phoenix, vol. 4, no. 11, November 1984.Black, Claudia. "Parental Alcoholism Leaves Most Kids Without Information, Feelings, Hope" The Phoenix,  vol. 4, no.
11, November 1984.Hamburg, Jay. "Student of Depression Sights a Silver Lining" St. Paul Pioneer Press and Dispatch (Orlando Sentinel),
23 September 1985.
Jeffris, Maxine. "About the Word Co-Dependency" The Phoenix, vol. 5, no. 7, July 1985.Kahn, Aron. "Indecision Decidedly in Vogue" St. Paul Pioneer Press and Dispatch, 1 April 1986.
 
page_249
Page 250
Kalbrener, John. "We Better Believe That Our Children Are People, Says Children Are People" The Phoenix,  vol. 4, no.
11, November 1984.LeShan, Eda. "Beware the Helpless" Woman's Day, 26 April 1983.Ross, Walter S. "Stress: It's Not Worth Dying For" Reader's Digest, January 1985, 76.Schumacher, Michael. "Sharing the Laughter with Garrison Keillor" Writer's Digest, January 1986, 33.Strick, Lisa Wilson. "What's So Bad About Being So-So?" Reader's Digest , August 1984, 78 (reprinted from Woman's
Day, 3 April 1984).
Miscellaneous:
"Adult Children of Alcoholics," handout, author unknown."Detachment," handout written by anonymous Al-Anon members.Jourard, Sidney, with Ardis Whitman. "The Fear That Cheats Us of Love," handout.Larsen, Earnie. "Co-Dependency Seminar," Stillwater, MN, 1985.
Wright, Thomas. "Profile of a Professional Caretaker," handout.
 
page_250
