
Healing Ev eryday Traumas
Healing Ev eryday Traumas
FREE YOURSELF FROM THE SCARS OF BULLYING,
CRITICISM AND REJECTION
Lynn Mary K arjala, Ph.D .
Psychology Innovations Press
ROSWELL, GEORGIA
Healing Everyday Traumas: Free Yourself from the Scars of Bullying, Criticism and
Rejection
by Lynn Mary Karjala, Ph.D.
© 2017 by Lynn Mary Karjala. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed or transmitted in any
form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or
mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except
in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other
noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law. For permission requests, write to
the publisher, addressed “Attention: Permissions Coordinator,” at the address
below.
Psychology Innovations Press
11205 Alpharetta Highway, Suite A-4
Roswell, Georgia/30076
www.healingeverydaytraumas.com
Quantity sales. Special discounts are available on quantity purchases by
corporations, associations, and others. For details, contact the “Special Sales
Department” at the address above.
Cover photo by Strikker@Fotolia.com
Cover design by fiverr.com/Lauria
Illustration by Laurence Brockway
Quintessential Safe Place imagery reprinted by permission from Heartland
Initiative, Inc.
Publisher’s Cataloging-In-Publication Data
(Prepared by The Donohue Group, Inc.)
Names: Karjala, Lynn Mary.
Title: Healing everyday traumas : free yourself from the scars of bullying, criticism
and rejection / Lynn Mary Karjala, Ph.D.
Description: 1st ed. | Roswell, Georgia: Psychology Innovations Press, [2017] |
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017931047 | ISBN 978-0-9984545-5-9 (paperback) | ISBN 978-
0-9984545-9-7 (hardcover) | ISBN 978-0-9984545-1-1 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Mind and body therapies. | Psychic trauma-Alternative treatment.
| Visualization--Therapeutic use. | Mindfulness (Psychology) | Energy
psychology. | Criticism, Personal. | Self-esteem.
Classification: LCC RC489.M53 K37 2017 (print) | LCC RC489.M53 (ebook) | DDC
616.8914--dc23
This book is dedicated to
Dr. Graham B laine, who first showed me what
good ther apy was all about,
to the man y clinicians and r esear chers who
have shaped m y understanding of this work,
and to m y patients,
who ha ve been the gr eatest teachers of al l.
You are a chi ld of the univ erse no less than the tr ees and
the stars; y ou ha ve a right to be her e.
–Max Ehrmann, “Desiderata”
Contents
Introduction
What I s Trauma?
The Ef fects of T rauma
More Consequences of T rauma: The T roublesome T wins
When the Cri tical V oice I s in Char ge
The Cri tical V oice in Dai ly Life
Learning to R ecogniz e Your Own Cri tical V oice
A Traditional Appr oach to T reatment
And for the Mor e Adv enturous: An I ntroduction to Ener gy
Psychology
Basic Acupr essure Technique
A Chakr a-Based T echnique
Putting These T echniques to Use: Mor e Bells and Whistles
References
Appendix A: The Quintessential Saf e Place
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest appreciation to Roma Anjoy,
Gloria Arenson , Donna Eden, Stephanie Eldringhof f, Rosem ary Engle,
Fred Gallo, Ryah Ki, Pat Layton, Trudy Robertson, Robert Schwarz,
Janet Taylor, and Jay Taylor for taking their valuable time to read and
comment on the manuscript. I am indebted to Laurence Brockway
for allowing me to use his diagram of acupr essure points and to
Lowel l Routley of Heartland Initiative, Inc., for permission  to reprint
the Quintessential Saf e Place imagery .
Thanks also go to Lee Clevenger, Amy Collins, John Eggen, Nick
Stephenson, and Christ y Tryhus for their tutelage on book publishing
and to Joel Friedlander and James Chandler for help with the interior
and co ver designs.
Disclaimer
Many of the clinical examples described in this book are real or
based on real events. The names of the people involved, howev er,
are entir ely ficti tious.
Some of the material for this work was adapted from Dr.
Karjala’ s earlier book, Understanding Trauma and Dissociation: A
Guide f or Ther apists, P atients and Lo ved Ones .
This book is designed to provide information about the subject
matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher
and author are not engaged in rendering psychologica l or other
professional services to its readers. If psychological or other expert
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional
should be sought.
Although every effort has been made to verify the accuracy of
the information contained herein, the author and publisher assume
no responsibi lity for any errors or omissions. The purpose of this
book is to educate and inform. The author and publisher shall have
neither liability nor responsibi lity to any person or entity with respect
to any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or
indirectly b y the inf ormation contained in this book.
If you do not wish to be bound by the above, you may
return this book to the publisher for a full refund .
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
HAVE YOU EVER FOUND YOURSELF exclaiming, “Why am I making
such a big deal out of this?!” I’d be surprised if you haven’t asked
yoursel f that question, or some variation of it, at one time or
another . You’ve probably asked it many times. Most of us in
mainstr eam North American culture learn to say it to ourselves very
early in our l ives.
“So what if the sales clerk was rude – I shouldn’ t let it bother
me.”
“I know my sister means well with her advice – why do I get so
bent out of shape?”
And we don’t just do this to ourselv es, of course. We also learn quite
early to do i t to each other .
“It’s just a sales presentation. You don’t need to feel anxious
over it.”
“Your brother-in-law is a jerk. You shouldn’ t let it upset you like
that.”
“It was just a little lie – it’s not like I killed somebody . Why are
you making such a big deal out of i t?”
Or if you’re one of the few people not plagued by this kind of
thinking, perha ps what you’ve asked is, “Why is he (or she) making
such a big deal out of this?”
If you can relate to what I’m talking about, this book is for you.
Even if you haven’t quite put it into words before, what you’ve
noticed is that seemingly small events – events that you believe
shouldn’ t still bother you–so metimes have the power to make you
feel profoundly hurt or blazingly angry . What’s more, many kinds of
“smal l” events that happen early in our lives cause ripple s that are
still felt far down the str eam of time.
My goal in this book is to help you understand why we “make
such a big deal” out of events and circumstances that seem, at face
value, to be trivial, inconseq uential, unimportant. And the value of
reaching a new understandi ng of people’ s reactions – yours and
others’ – is that it can lead to profound, positive changes. It can
make enormous differences in how you think, how you feel and,
perhaps most important, how y ou treat yoursel f and other people.
In order to understand how this works, there are three essential
concepts we’ll need to talk about. The first is the concept of trauma.
You might be surprised to learn that there’s no single, agreed-upon
defini tion of just what trauma is. The second is what I call “everyday
trauma. ” This concept include s all those kinds of events I mentioned
a moment ago – the unpleasant events of daily life that may seem
small at the time but that turn out to have effects lasting years and
even decades. The third concept is the critical voice. Virtual ly
everyone has this negativistic, nagging aspect of himsel f or hersel f.
For some, it’s a dispar aging running commentary , a litany of failure
that never lets up. Even for those who don’t feel its presence
constantly , it lurks in the backgr ound, ready to pounce on any
perceived mistak e.
Chapter 2 explores various defini tions of trauma to help us
understand why some events are traumatic while others are not. In
that context, it also explains the concept of everyday trauma, so that
we can see why common, everyday events – even quite normal
developmental events, such as the first day of school – may be
experienced as traumatic under some circumstances. Chapter 3
describes the aftereffects of trauma. As we look at the symptoms of
post-traumatic stress disorder, we’ll be able to see how the same
pattern of symptoms resulting from major trauma also occurs after
everyday trauma, just scaled down in pr oportion.
Chapter 4 introduces the critical voice. Many self-help writers
have suggeste d similar concepts, of course, but this book does
something more: we’ll discuss in detail a conceptual ization of how
the critical voice is born and how it develops overtime. That will
allow us to understand better why it takes on the particular
characteristics that i t does.
The critical voice is capable of influencing us in profound ways.
But it’s also sneaky and is often able to hide its machina tions from
our conscious awareness, so that we have no idea we’re acting
under its influence. Knowin g its characteristics will allow us to
recogniz e it much more readily. Chapter 5 presents a picture of what
we experience when we allow it to take over and control us. Chapter
6 goes into somewhat more detail in applying these concepts to a
number of specific issues, such as parenting, procrastination, and
grief.
Of course, simply knowing  about  the critical voice is not
enough–f ar more important is knowing what to do about it. The
remainder of the book is about how to help yoursel f heal the effects
of everyday trauma and take your power back from the critical voice.
The first step in this process , described in Chapter 7, is to learn to
recogniz e when and how the critical voice is exerting its effects. It’s
difficult to treat something that you can’t see. Chapter 8 offers a
blend of traditional techniques drawn from cogni tive behavioral
therapy, guided imagery and mindf ulness.
For some readers, this approach may be as far as they want to
go. My experience over many years, howev er, has convinced me
that, while traditional techniques certainly have value, their
effectiveness can be significantly enhanced by combining them with
mind-body techniques. If you’re willing to think a bit outside the
box–especial ly if you’ve tried traditional therapy techniques and
gotten stuck before–you may find this new approach refreshing and
exciting. Chapter 9 introduces you to a relatively new field called
energy psychology , which is closely allied to the concepts of mind-
body medicine. Chapter 10 teaches you how to use one of the best-
known energy psychology methods called Emotional Freedom
Techniques, or EFT, as well as a technique from Thought Field
Therapy (TFT). If you aren’t familiar with those names, you may
have heard about them (and similar methods) as “tapping. ” Chapter
11 presents a different kind of energy psychology techniq ue that
uses the chakr as, the major energy centers running down the
midline of the body. Finally, Chapter 12 describes further refinement s
that you can add to the basic techniques to help make them even
more effective.
CHAPTER 2
What I s Trauma?
IMAGINE, IF YOU WILL, a traditional elementary school classr oom
from the 1950s. The children stay in the same room all day, so there
are no lockers in the hallway. Instead, each classr oom has a
cloakr oom in the back wher e students put their coats and galoshes.
Bobby was a boister ous, active little boy, with a squeal ing
laugh that could be heard down the block. He wasn’t
intentional ly defiant or rude, but he had a hard time toning
down his high spirits, even at school. Mrs. Johnson, a second-
grade teacher , liked to run her classr oom with order and
discipl ine. She expected her students to be quiet, attentiv e and
respectf ul.
One pleasant fall day, Bobby had an especial ly hard time
settling down–his favorite aunt and uncle were coming for a
visit. He would be quiet for a while, but then Mrs. Johnson
would say something that reminded him of his excitement, and
off he would go again, bouncing up and down in his seat and
blurting out r andom thoughts as they came to mind .
Finally Mrs. Johnson had had enough. She walked over to
his seat, grasped him firmly by the arm, and marched him to
the back of the classr oom. She opened the door of the
cloakr oom, put him inside, and closed the door. He could hear
the snick of the lock. He could hear a murmur of voices as the
lesson continued in the classr oom.
At first he was startled and a bit confused. He knew he
shouldn’ t have been cutting up in class, but he didn’t think he’d
done anything all that bad – but then again, it must have been
really bad for Mrs. Johnson to lock him up. Only bad people are
locked up, aren’t they? After a while, he realized that he
couldn’ t hear voices any more. Alone in the dark, he had no
sense of how much time had passed. Had they left for the day?
Had they all forgotten about him and gone home, leaving him
locked up in the closet all night? He knock ed on the door and
called for Mrs. Johnson. No one answer ed. His fear began to
mount and turned to panic. He pounded on the door and
screamed f or someone to let him out .
When Mrs. Johnson opened the door, Bobby stumbled out
sobbing, his face covered with tears. She handed him a tissue
and told him to take his seat. As he looked around dazedly, he
realized that the other kids were just coming in from recess. It
wasn’t even lunchtime yet–he had been in the closet for an
hour at the most. He felt embarr assed and ashamed of his own
fear. And worse, some of the other kids were openly laughing at
him. As he slunk to his seat and sat down, he could hear the
snickers following him. He knew that the teasing and ridicu le for
having been caught crying would continue f or months .
Bobby’s parents noticed that night that he seeme d
unusual ly subdued. But he was much too embarr assed to admit
what had happened, so when they asked if there was anything
wrong, he said no. Since he seemed to return to normal in a
day or two , they didn’ t ask him again .
But Bobby never again cut up in class. In fact, he tried very
hard not to attract attention to himsel f at all. Through grade
school, high school, and even college, his grades were
mediocr e. He never compete d in Science Fair or ran for class
office. He became, f or all intents and purposes, in visible .
The Definition of Trauma
We’re used to thinking of traumas as earth-shat tering, life-
shattering events – fire, flood, death and destruction. Indeed, if you
look at the official1 descrip tion of post-traumatic stress disorder, or
PTSD, you’ll find that in order to qualify for this diagnosis a person is
supposed to have experience d an event that is life-threatening (or at
least per ceived as l ife-threatening) to himsel f or someone else.
This defini tion is far from perfect. There are many events that
are clearly traumatic that are not life-threatening . Bobby’s
experience is a good example. He was never in any physical danger .
He was afraid, even panick ed, but the thought that he might die
never entered his head. If you were to ask Bobby today, he would
tell you that the most damaging part of the incident –by far–was the
shame and ridicule he experienced after he was let out of the
cloakr oom.
Let’s take another example. Imagine that you and your family
have just come home from an evening at the movies to find your
house on fire. The fire trucks are already there, the lights are
flashing, the water is hissing  on the flames, the captain is shouting
orders to the firefighters. In spite of their best efforts, you stand
helplessly by and watch the house burn to the ground with all of
your possessions. If there was no one home (including pets), then
you and your family were not in danger , and the requirement that
the experience be “life-threatening” wouldn’ t have been met. By the
strictest interpr etation of the diagnosis, you couldn’ t be said to have
PTSD. But most people would find this experience devastating, and
at least some of them will displa y typical PTSD-type symptoms at
some point afterw ard.
The same issue arises with surviv ors of various forms of child
abuse. Some children are beaten or tortur ed to the point that they
really do believe they’re dying or in mortal danger . Some abusers
explicitly tell their victims that they’ll kill them –or their parents,
siblings or pets –if they tell anyone. But these circumstances are by
no means always the case; it’s not difficult to find many instances of
abuse in which  there was no overt violenc e or threat of violence at
all. For example, sexual abuse may take the form of seduction rather
than rape. A little girl might be told that she’s special, that she’s the
favorite, that she’s a princess . The sexual behavior might be called a
game. Even without any physical violence, howev er, few people
today would question that sexual molestation is a signi ficant tr auma.
At the other extreme, there undoubtedly is value in not
watering down the concept so much that every pinprick becomes a
trauma. Just because your 13-year-old daughter engages in much
wailing and gnashing of teeth when you tell her that you won’t allow
her to get her bellybutton pierced, that does not necessari ly mean
that the experience is a trauma for her. It might not qualify as a
trauma even if it really were true that everyone else in her school
was doing it. (Note, howev er, that we can’t automatical ly dismiss this
incident as trivial, either. Feeling different from one’s peers and
excluded by them certainly can be traumatic and can cause
consider able heartache. )
So where do we draw the line? Which events are trauma s and
which are not? Unfortunately , there’s no obvious, automatic answer .
Some events – the fire-flood-death- and-destruction kind, as well as
the more invasive, boundary -violating kinds of childhood abuse– are
likely to be traumatic no matter when they happen or to whom.
Aside from those life-shat tering occurrences, though, it depends a
great deal on individual differences. Two people can go through
exactly the same event, and one can experience it as traumatic
while the other finds it relatively benign. If Bobby had been a
teenager when  he was put in the cloakr oom, for example , and if he
had no significant history of physical or emotional abuse , it’s much
less likely that he would have been thrown into a panic. He might
even have taken the whole experience as a bit of a joke and come
out laughing. It’s also true that the same person can go through a
variety of events that look similar on the surface and find afterw ards
that some of the events have been encoded as traumas while others
have not.
The Back-Door Approach to a Definition
Since there is no obvious line to be drawn in determining
whether a particular event is a trauma or not, one way to make the
distinction is to look at the consequences of the event. There is a
recognizable pattern of symptoms that occurs in response to trauma.
(These symptoms are described in detail in Chapter 3.) Therefore,
we could simply say that if the person displa ys this pattern of
symptoms in response to an event, then the event must have been a
trauma for him or her. In short, we’re saying that a trauma is any
event that causes tr aumatic ef fects.
There is something to be said for this defini tion. Over my years
of practice, I’ve become convinced that there is no such thing as an
unjusti fied feeling. I don’t think it’s physiological ly possible to have a
feeling that doesn’ t have a corresponding cause or explanation.
When a patien t tells me that an event felt THIS bad, we inevitably
find out that there was a very good reason why it was THIS bad,
even if it didn’ t look that bad on the surf ace.
With that thought in mind, take another look at the front cover
of this book. In the pictur e, you can see ripples in the water. You
can’t see what caused the ripples –but you can form a pretty good
guess about how big it must have been from the size of the
disturbance it created. The same thing can be said of trauma. As I’m
first getting to know a patient and learning about her symptoms and
presenting problems, I’m already beginning to form an idea of the
severity of her trauma history from the magni tude of her traumatic
reaction–ev en bef ore I know what ma y have caused i t.
Now, let me quickly add that this notion of justified feelings
does not give people license to behave badly. I am not saying that
all behavior is justified. Feelings and behavior are different and
separ ate. Just because a person feels angry does not mean that he
or she is automatical ly justified in acting on it. We all have personal
responsibi lity for our actions and the consequences they cause.
What I do mean is that (barri ng the effects of drugs or whatev er) for
every feeling there is a reasonable explanation. We just don’t always
know what it is. But once we do know the explanation, the intensi ty
of the feeling is always understandable and can be seen as justified–
every single time. So if we see traumatic effects in response to an
event, it’s reasonable to conclude that the event was a trauma.
People simply don’ t have traumatic r eactions to nontr aumatic ev ents.
The Concept of Shattered Assumptions
On the other hand, coming through the back door and defining
something in terms of its effects is circular logic. Sometimes it’s
necessary , but it’s not consider ed good science. And in this case I
think we can do a l ittle bet ter.
In an insightf ul book called Shattered Assumptions , Ronnie
Janof f-Bulman (1992) described the emotional impact of trauma in a
new and different way. She suggested that we all start out in life
holding thr ee basic assumptions:
1. The world is benev olent. We assume that the world is, for the
most part, a safe place and that we can expect a positive,
supportiv e response f rom other people.
2. The world has meaning . We expect to be able to understand
why things happen as they do. In particular , we have a sense of
justice, and we expect that things will be reasonably fair and
evenhanded.
3. The self is worthy. We believe that we are essential ly good
persons, worth y of respect and lo ve from others.
When a trauma occurs, according to Janof f-Bulman, the effect
is that one or more of these three assumptions are shattered.
Healing the trauma then involves identi fying which assumptions
were shat tered and finding w ays to r ebuild them.
In her writing, Janof f-Bulman focuses on her concept of
shattered assumptions as the most important conse quence of
trauma. But I think the concept is even more far-reaching  than that–
rather than seeing it simply as a description of what happens after
trauma, it’s an excellent way of conceptual izing what trauma is.
From this point of view, a trauma can be defined as any event that
damages one or mor e of the thr ee basic assumptions.
This is not a perfect defini tion. For one thing, it still depends
partly on observing what happens after the fact. But it does give us
a framework for thinking about an event before it happens and
making a prediction about whether it seems likely to be experienced
as a tr auma.
The Concept of Everyday Trauma
An important point to observ e from the examples we’ve seen so
far is that we can’t always sit outside of an experience, make an
objectiv e judgment about the magni tude of the event, and know for
certain whether the event was traumatic or not for the people who
lived it. Just because some thing doesn’ t look like a trauma to
someone else (or even to ourselv es) doesn’ t mean that it wasn’t
one. Even seemingly quite small, everyday events, much smaller
than was previously thought, can be stored as traumatic memories.
These ar e what I cal l everyday traumas.
Bullying, for example, is unfortunately now an everyday
occurrence in virtual ly all of our schools. I wonder if there is any
child who gets all the way through school these days without being
exposed to bullying in one form or another . Being physical ly
threatened is not the only kind of bullying, and perhaps not the
worst for many children. As with Bobby, being ridiculed may be even
more painf ul.
Ann transferred into a new school in the middle of the year.
She was shy and didn’t make friends easily. It didn’t help that
several of the more prominent girls were members of a well-
establ ished cl ique that made i t clear she w asn’t welcome .
One of the “in” girls, though, seemed to want to be her
friend. Lydia was soft-spok en and seemed quite sweet -natur ed,
unlike most of the others in the clique, and Ann though t she
could trust her. When Lydia asked her for her locker
combination, Ann ga ve it to her .
When Ann went to her locker at the end of the day, she
found it trashed. Her coat was wadded up on the floor, papers
were crumpled , books thrown in on top of the mess. There
didn’t seem to be any point in reporting it to her teache r–she
didn’t know who had done the actual damage and couldn’ t
prove it even if she did. The teacher would probably just shrug
it off anyway. She certainly didn’t want to admit to her parents
that she was such a misfit. She felt violated, mortified that
someone could dislike her so much, and utterly powerless to
make things di fferent.
Even things that are consider ed normal developmental events
can turn out to have traumatic consequences. Consider the example
of the first day of school, part of the normal course of development
for most chi ldren.
For Carol, who came from a stable home and who was
physical ly, cognitively, emotio nally and social ly ready, the first
day of school was exciting and joyful. She liked her teacher very
much, and she made a new f riend right a way.
For Julie, who already knew how to read, it was boring.
She would much rather have been home where she could play
her piano . But it wasn’t scary , just dul l.
But Susie’s mother had a history of seizur es, and Susie had
come to feel that she was responsible for protecting her mother
and taking care of her. For her, the day at school seemed like an
eterni ty of agonizing f ear.
Looking into the classr oom from outside, we might have been
able to notice that these three little girls were in rather different
moods. We might even have noticed that Susie seemed anxious
about being there. But unless we knew her particular history , there’s
no way we could have guessed how painful this “normal” event was
or wh y.
With the concept of shattered assumptions, on the other hand,
we can understand – at least in hindsight –why these events were
traumatic for Ann and Susie. For Ann, all three of the basic
assumptions were shattered. Her school environment was clearly not
safe, because someone she trusted betrayed her; the damage to her
possessions was unjusti fied and unfair; and the message of
disrespect and dislike was unmistakable. In Susie’ s case, the reason
for the lack of safety was different, but her feeling was similar: the
world was not a safe place for her mother or, by extension, for her.
That would have been an ongoing theme. She may even have felt it
was unfair what she and her mother had to go through.  And most
important on this particular day, she would have felt an excruciating
sense of f ailure because she w asn’t doing her job .
The Nature of Traumatic Memory
There’s a great deal of controversy about the nature of
traumatic memory and, in particular , whether traumatic memories
are different from “normal” memories. For those readers who have a
serious interest in this question, I’d recommend Brown and Sheflin’s
(1998) book, Memory , Trauma Treatment, and the Law. Van der
Kolk’s Traumatic Stress (Van der Kolk, McFarlane, & Weisaeth, 2006)
also gives an excellent explanation of how traumatic experiences
trigger a speci fic sequence of ph ysiological changes in the body .
For the lay reader who doesn’ t want or need to go into that
much detail, here’s a way of thinking about traumatic memory that
can be v ery usef ul.
This theory suggests that our memory of any experience we’ve
had is made up of four major components that form the acronym
BASK (Braun, 1988). B stands for behavior. This includes all of the
body movements that we made or witnessed during the experience.
A stands f or affect, another wor d for emotion. I n a pleasant memory ,
this might include happine ss, joy, excitement and love. In a
traumatic experience, it’s likely to be fear, anxiet y, anger , rage, guilt,
shame, hopele ssness, or helplessness. S is for sensation, all the
sensory information that gets register ed during the experience–
sights, sounds, smells, pain, etc. K stands for knowledge, the
cogni tive awareness of what happened, including our interpretations
of the ev ent and the bel iefs we f orm about i t.
In nontraumatic circumstances, it seems that all four
components are experienced together and stored together in normal
narrative memory . Normal storage is like leaving the memory out in
the yard exposed to the elements. Parts of it, especial ly the sensory
information, erode very quickly , so that when we recall it there’s a
very clear difference between experiencing it the first time and
remembering it afterw ards. If I asked you what you had for dinner
last night, the odds are you could tell me, but you probably wouldn’ t
be tasting i t as y ou wer e remembering.
Traumatic memories, thoug h, seem to be quite different.
According to the theory , during a traumatic experience one or more
of the comp onents get split off, or dissociated, and stored
separ ately. Instead of being exposed to normal erosion, it’s as if a
part of the mind becomes frozen in that moment in time and held in
the subconscious–much like Ötzi, the 5,300 year-old man who was
found in a glacier several years ago, amazingly well preserv ed in the
ice. Time doesn’ t seem to matter at all. The Roman philosopher
Publius Terentius Afer is credited with originating the expression
“Time heals all wounds. ” He said a few other things that were more
apt, but in this case he was completely wrong. The passage of time
may cover up emotional wounds but, just by itself, it does not heal
them.
In the interests of thoroughness, I should add that, while time
alone doesn’t seem to make a difference, recall does. Recent work
by Ecker (2011) and others  has shown us that memo ries, even
traumatic memories, are more malleable than we used to think. Each
time a memory is reactiv ated (i.e., recalled vividly), it’s subject to
being altered, or “reconsol idated. ” Howev er, Ecker also found that
certain condi tions need to be met in order for “deep emotional
learnings” to be changed. If a traumatic memory is kept buried, or if
it’s recalled but these specific condi tions are not met, the memory
and the beliefs that grew out of it remain remarkably intact over
time.
Because the traumatic memory isn’t subject to normal erosion
or weathering, when it gets recalled to conscious awareness it has
much the full impact of the original event. It feels as if we’re reliving
it, not just remembering it. The feelings, the thoughts and beliefs,
and sometimes even the body sensations can be as clear and vivid
as the first time they happened, even if that day was decades
before.
Howev er, there is a major difference between physical objects
frozen in ice and memories “frozen” in time. Ötzi’s body, and the
rocks and plants and other objects also frozen in the glacier , were
inert–that is, they had no perceptible effect on the environment
around them. That’s not true of traumatic memories. Even though
some or all of the components of the memories are dissociated and
we may not even be able to recall them on a conscious level, they
can still exert insidious effects on our present -day behavior and
experiences.
1 There isn’t actually one “official” definition of PTSD. However, most clinicians
who are called on to make diagnoses of psychiatric disorders are expected to use
the categories found in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual , currently in its fifth edition and referred to for short as DSM-5.
CHAPTER 3
The Ef fects of T rauma
AFTER PEOPLE HAVE EXPERIENCED a severe trauma, they often
experience and displa y a particular pattern of symptoms. As I
mentioned earlier, this pattern of symptoms is called post-traumatic
stress disor der, or PT SD.
As described in the diagnostic manual, the DSM-5, one set of
symptoms involves re-experiencing the trauma in one or more ways.
Distressing thoughts, feelings, and images of the traumatic event
may intrude into the person’ s everyday awareness. It’s not
uncommon to have nightma res of the event. The person may at
times feel or act as if the event were happening again in the
present. And people often experience both intense psychological
pain and symptoms of physical distress (e.g., sweating, shaking)
when ever they encounter somethi ng that brings up the memory of
the ev ent.
A second set of symptoms has to do with avoidance behavior.
People who have been traumatiz ed often go to great lengths to
avoid anything  that might remind them of the trauma (and therefore
cause the kind of re-experiencing just described). They avoid
thinking or talking about the event. They avoid objects, activities,
places and people that ar e associated wi th the ev ent in an y way.
A third set of symptoms includes negativ e changes or
distortions in thinking and mood. Surviv ors may be unable to recall
important aspects of the event–or even the event as a whole. They
may experience persistent negativ e emotions such as horror, anger ,
shame and guilt. Avoidance  can also take the form of a gener al
emotional numbness. Traumatiz ed people have trouble showing or
even experiencing positive emotions such as love, joy, excitement, or
enthusiasm. They often feel detached from the people and things
they cared deeply about before the trauma. They may drift away
from activities that used to be important to them. They may develop
negativ e beliefs about themselv es or irrational ly blame themselv es or
others for the trauma. And they may have little or no hope that their
lives will ever be back to normal.
A fourth set of symptoms includes various forms of physiological
arousal. These include insomnia, irritability, anger outbursts,
difficulty concentr ating, and an exagger ated startle response. One of
the classic symptoms in this category is hypervigi lance, the intent
scanning for any hint of threat or danger . In fact, psychologist Judith
Herman (1992 ) suggested that the hallmark of PTSD is the constant
alternation between being numb , “zoned out” and under responsiv e
and being h ypervigi lant and h yperalert.
For the moment, let’s consid er an example that’s much more
severe than everyday trauma and clearly illustrates typical PTSD
symptoms:
Lois worked late one night in December , and by the time
she left her office it was well after dark. Walking to her car, she
had her keys in her hand as a safety precaution, but she was
wasn’t at all scared – there had never been any trouble in the
neighborhood. Before opening the car door, she looked around
to admir e the Christmas decor ations on the nearb y buildings
and even humm ed a snatch of an old carol. As she was bending
over to put her briefcase in the back seat, a man in a ski mask
lunged at her out of the shadows. He threw one arm around
her chest, held a knife to her throat, and threatened to kill her
if she screame d. When she struggled, he clenched his forearm
around her throat, choking her. He dragged her to the alleyway
next to the building, threw her to the ground, and raped her.
After he ran off, she stumbled back into the building and
reported the crime to the police, but the man was never
caught .
In the first few days after the trauma, Lois tried to act as if
nothing had happened. She went through her daily routine of
work and household chores, although she felt like a zombie and
had a great deal of trouble focusing on anything. Even though
she had nightmar es several times a week, she refused the
suggestion of counsel ing, saying that the last thing she wanted
to do was to bring up the event and go through it all over
again. Over time, howev er, she gradual ly changed more and
more. Where she had been one of the compan y’s best
emplo yees, she became unmotiv ated, listless and irritable. She
stopped wearing scarves or even turtlenecks – anything that fit
closely around her throat. Any sudden noise or movement
would make her jump. The sight of someone wearing a ski
mask would turn her knees to water. Terrified of being
anywher e but home after dark, she watched the clock and left
every day on the dot of 5:00. She stopped dating, because she
felt “damaged” and thought that no man would want a serious
relationship with her once he knew. She even stopped
accepting invitations from her friends if it meant going
anywher e in the evening by hersel f. Over time, many of her
friends drifted away, and she let them go. And when the next
December came, she found hersel f hating the twinkl ing
Christmas l ights that, in the past, had alw ays made her smi le.
In Lois’ case, we can clearly see that this event shattered all
three of Janof f-Bulman’ s basic assumptions: that the world is safe,
that what happens to her is fair and predictable, and that she is a
worth while person. We can also see the pattern of symptoms that
characteriz e PTSD–the intrusiv e recollections, the avoidance
behavior, the heightened startle response, the emotional numbing,
and so on. If she did decide  to seek treatment, any good clinician
should be able to diagnose this pat tern wi th relative ease.
Flashbacks
As we’ve discussed, one of the major differences between
traumatic and nontraumatic memories is that when a traumatic
memory is recalled, it feels as if we’re reliving it, not just
remembering it. When people relive all or part of an event, the
formal term for this kind of experience is an “intrusiv e recollection, ”
but the much mor e common term is “flashback. ”
Our stereotyped idea of a flashback is the combat vet crawling
through the garden thinking he’s back in Vietnam or Iraq. But what
I’ve observ ed in practice is that flashbacks can actual ly come in
assorted shapes and sizes – because the dissociated BASK
components can come back separ ately or in a variety of
combinations. One of my favorite examples is from a patient who
called me up in something  of a panic because she’d awakened
during the night with the complete sensation of a hand grabbing her
ankle. She was alone in the room when it happened, but she
actual ly threw the covers back to make sure that there wasn’t some
disembodied hand holding onto her–like something from a zombie
movie or Thing from the Addams Family. She had no cogni tive
awareness of what it was about, nor any emotional component of
the memory . (She was a bit scared that she was going crazy, but
that was in the here and now, not part of the flashback). This was a
sensory flashback.
Affective flashb acks are often the easiest to identi fy. When Lois
reacted with terror to the sight of a ski mask or a darkening sky, she
was clearly reliving the emotion of her trauma. Have you ever had a
negativ e feeling hit you out of the blue and you had no idea where it
came from? Or you could relate the nature of the emotio n to what
was going on in the present moment, but you knew that the
intensi ty was way out of proportion? That was probably an affective
flashback. The emotion was quite genuine– and one of the major
themes of this book is to encour age you to accept such feelings as
valid and important signals. It’s just that the feeling was valid in
some other time and place, not in the pr esent.
Remember that the knowledge, or K, component includes not
only our understanding of the traumatic event, but also whatev er
beliefs we develop in response to it. Take the example of Lois again.
After her trauma, she developed the belief “I’m damaged goods, and
no decent man will ever want me.” As long as her trauma remains
unresolved, this belief is likely to manifest itself over and over again
in her l ife–a cogni tive flashback.
People often repeat behavior that comes out of trauma. The
playground bully who beats up other children may well be re-
enacting physical abuse that was done to him. Similarly, the
repetition of stylized pelvic thrusts, especial ly when accompanied by
an attitude of grim determination rather than a simple joy of
movement, has been identi fied as a red flag of possible sexual
abuse. (Please note that this is by no means certain evidence, only a
possible indicator .) These examples could both be consider ed
behavioral flashbacks.
The Effects of Everyday Trauma
In Chapter 2, I suggested that any event can be consider ed a
trauma if it violates one or more of the three basic assumptions –
even if that event, on the face of it, seems small and insignificant. In
this chapter, we’ve talked about the fact that traumatic events have
a recognizable pat tern of consequences.
What got me thinking about the concept of everyday trauma in
the first place was the realization that these “smal l” events, which
were routinely dismissed by my patients as insigni ficant, had the
same, recognizable pattern of consequences that major traumas do.
They wer e just scaled down in pr oportion and ther efore mor e subtle.
Think back to the example of Bobby, the boy who was locked in
the cloakr oom by his teacher . If we were getting to know him in a
therapeutic setting, one of the first things that would stand out is his
pronounced emotional numb ing and detachment. Undern eath that,
we would probably find, among other things, an intense desire to
avoid any circumstance in which he could be publicly ridiculed –
hence his need to be invisible. He might even show marked
physiological reactions to seemingly unrelated situations – for
example, having to give a speech in front of a group and being in a
small, enclosed space such as an elevator–without ever realizing that
these reactions  had a common origin in the cloakr oom incident. We
would also be unsurprised to find that Bobby still had occasional
nightmar es about being in small spaces, persistent feelings of
shame, and long-standing negativ e beliefs about his self-worth and
the trustworthiness of other people.
Traumatic Patterns
What makes matters even worse is that traumatic experiences
accumulate. Oftentimes, the damage doesn’ t stop with the one,
single event. Let’s take an even smaller example than Bobby’s – the
first time someone criticized you or called you stupid or clumsy or
whatev er. It hurt, because you didn’t have a way to stop it from
getting in, but it did somethin g else as well. It changed your view of
the world. At that moment you became aware that someone could
think that of you. Without knowing it, you began to listen to see if it
would happen  again. If it did, or if you gather ed other bits of
information in a similar vein, then it accumulated into a traumatic
pattern. Most of the 1,587 events that went into the pattern you
probably don’t even remember individual ly, but we can see the
effects in the bel ief that sa ys,
“I’m so stupid. ”
“If I speak up , everyone wi ll laugh at me. ”
“No mat ter how har d I try , it’s never good
enough. ”
After a traumatic pattern is establ ished, the situation becomes
even worse–the pattern takes on a self-perpetuating quality. The
belief that was gener ated by the pattern begins to act as a filter.
Information that fits the pattern gets through, while contradictory
information is screened out. For example, when people with low self-
esteem receive a compl iment, they usually do one of two things with
it. One w ay they often handle i t is to dismiss i t as untrue.
Mary sa ys: “Y ou’re such a nice person. ”
Sue thinks: “If she r eally knew me, she wouldn’ t say that. ”
If they know that the comm ent is true, so that it can’t simply be
dismissed out of hand, they find a w ay to dev alue i t.
Nancy sa ys: “Y ou’re so intel ligent. ”
George thinks: “So what if I’m smart –what have I accompl ished
with it? That mak es me an ev en worse f ailure.”
Once the belief filter is in place, you’re not just listening for
information that might fit the pattern. You’re actively interpr eting
events to make them fit what you’ve come to believe is true. Positive
or innocuous comments get twisted into criticisms that were never
intended.
Bob sa ys: “Y ou look r eally good toda y.”
Barbara believes: I’m ugly .
Barbara thinks: “He must think I look terrible most of the time. ”
Dolly says: “It ’s great that y ou can sew so wel l.”
Sarah believes: People always see me as clumsy and
incompetent .
Sarah thinks: “She’ s surprised that I can do an ything wel l.”
So the hurt continues to build. And since a natural response to
pain and f ear is anger , the anger continues to bui ld as wel l.
Back to Our Original Question
How many times have you found yoursel f asking “Why did I do
that?” or “Why am I making such a big deal out of this?” Or maybe
you’ve wonder ed why your friend Louise keeps getting involved with
one abusiv e man after another , or why John at work keeps blowing
up over nothing, even though everyone can see how it’s hurting his
career.
So here’s one of my most basic principles: I believe that at
every moment we’re always trying to make the best and healthiest
choices f or ourselv es that we can.
Unfortunately , our choices don’t always work out the way we
expect them to – let alone the way we want them to. I think there
are two main reasons why that’s true. The first is that stuff happens.
There are many things that happen in our lives that we can’t predict
and can’t control. If you had known that the stock you bought was
going to go down 10 points the week after you bought it, you would
have waited –or picked another stock. If we could even predict the
weather accurately, let alone control it, most people would choose to
have their weddings on sunny days, and you would always be able
to plan your ski vacation for a time when there was plenty of snow
on the slopes and none on the airport run ways.
We simply can’t know everything. Con men are well aware of
this and take advantage of it. The successful ones make their living
by being charming, ingratiating and, above all, believable–so it’s no
surprise that honest people often believe them. If we had a sure-fire
way of knowing when someone was lying or shading the truth,
they’d all be out of business in short or der.
The second reason why things don’t always go as planned is
that we often have feelings and beliefs and motiv es that are
dissociated, so that we’re not consciously aware of them. Like radon
coming from under the house , we don’t see these things directly, but
they can affect us profoundly nonetheless. Sometimes the
consequences are merely inconvenient, but sometimes they can be
disastr ous.
For example, most of us have things we would very much like
to do (or feel strongly that we should do) that we’re not doing, even
though there’s not an obvious reason why we’re not doing  them. I’m
sure that you can think of at least one thing that fits this description.
It might be quitting smoking, or getting more exercise, or taking up
a new hobby. Or picking up the phone and calling a relative or old
friend you haven’t spoken with in quite a while. Now rate your desire
to do this thing from 0 to 10, where 0 is not caring at all and 10 is
so intense that you want to go out and do it this very minute. If your
rating is 5 or more, you really do have a significant desire to do
whatev er this is. It’s not that you don’t care, despite what other
people may have said to you (or what you may have said to yoursel f
to explain y our beha vior).
So why aren’t you doing i t?
The answer is that, as strong as the push is in the positive
direction, you must have a block that’s even stronger that keeps you
stuck, or you would  be doing it. Blocks like this are caused by beliefs
and feelings that are deeply  held and very powerf ul. The fact that
you don’t know what the block is doesn’ t make it any less real–it
simply means that i t’s subconscious r ather than conscious.
How do we come to have these subconscious beliefs and
feelings that can be so powerf ul that they can completely  derail us?
Over the history of psychology , there have been a lot of different
ideas about that. Freud, for example, would argue that some of this
material comes from drives that are biological ly based and that
every human is born with. It’s certainly possible that heredity and
biology play a role, though not exactly the way Freud envisioned it.
But another major source, and the one that we’re focused on here,
is trauma.
Putting the Pieces Together So Far
Children get hurt. Some are hurt in large ways, such as physical
or sexual abuse; but all of us are hurt one way or another . No one
gets through childhood these days without experiencin g teasing,
ridicule or ev en ph ysical assaul t.
Psychologist Jim Dillon has pointed out that children are
completely alive to their own feelings until they encounter what he
calls “pollutants” such as bullying and put-downs. These pollutants
then cause them to deny their feelings and dissociate, or split off,
parts of themselv es.
Denial and dissociation are indeed common and very early
defense mecha nisms. But another part of the reason children begin
to deny their feelings is that they’re actively taught to do so. How
many times have you heard a parent say, “Oh, that’s just a little
scrape–why are you making such a big deal out of it?” And all of us
learned that “sticks and stones may break my bones, but names can
never hurt me. ”
Once we get good at doing this to ourselv es, we start doing it
to each other, too. “Oh, don’t get so upset, ” or “You shouldn’ t feel
anxious about that.” Think back–has it ever really helped you to be
told not to feel what you’re feeling? Of course you answer ed, “Oh,
you’re completely right. I shouldn’ t feel that way. Thank you so
much. I’m al l better now .”
So the pain and anger continue to build. And we keep shoving
them under the rug becaus e we’re taught that that’s what good
people do . Our f eelings get deader and mor e disconnected.
But as we’ve seen, feelings don’t simply go away when we
dissociate them. They continue to affect us. Eventual ly the anger
starts coming out sidew ays. Our self-esteem takes a beating. We
become overly critical of ourselv es and others. Louise gets into a
series of destructiv e relationships. John explodes at work. Susan
becomes bitingly sarcastic and sabotages her team’ s efforts. Jim’s
blood pressure goes sky-high. George’s road rage is so bad that he
fantasiz es about running someone off the road and nearly does it.
And some kid in a school somewher e picks up a gun and kills his
classmates and teachers.
CHAPTER 4
More Consequences of T rauma:
The T roublesome T wins
PART OF MY JOB as a clinician is psychoeducation –that is, teaching
my patients about how the mind works in gener al and how their
issues work in particular . Ever since I became a clinician, I’ve told my
patients about  what I call the internal critical voice–that nagging,
judgmental, pessimistic little imp in our heads. My assump tion at this
point is that every human being develops this aspect of his or her
personal ity. It simply manifests a bit differently depending on the
individual. Let ’s look at the cri tical v oice as i t typical ly dev elops.
Why would we ever create such a negativ e, punitive part of
ourselv es? When I was in graduate school, I worked as a resear ch
assistant for Dr. C. Dalton Jones, who was studying social
development. One of his most basic tenets was that “there is no
such thing as maladaptiv e behavior in children.” Another way of
saying the same thing is that every behavior we acquir e serves a
positive purpos e. It meets a need of some kind. The behavior only
becomes maladaptiv e when we transfer it to a different situation
where it doesn’ t work. For example, whining may be a very effective
strategy for some children to get their parents to give them what
they want, but it often backf ires badly when they exhibi t the same
behavior in school.
The original, positive purpose of the critical voice, I believe, is
to guide  and protect us. At its best, it’s what gives us the capaci ty to
be self-directed  and to oversee the quality of our own work. Without
it, we’d have no way of knowing whether we were doing right or
wrong, a good job or a bad job, unless someone else told us. In a
rare–and lucky–few people, the critical voice remains a firm but
gentle guide, providing just enough guilt feeling when necessary to
direct the person’s behavior into appropriate channels but letting the
guilt go bef ore it despoi ls his or her psy chological wel l-being.
For most of us, though, the protectiv e function of the critical
voice is vastly overshadowed by the unpleasant way it goes about its
job. Have you ever stopped to pay attention to the chatter that goes
on inside your head? There’s a self-help book called Self-Esteem
(McKay & Fanning, 2000) that I’ve often recommended to my
patients. One thing I like about it is that it has structur ed exercises
that people can work on. One of the very first exercises is to practice
listening for the critical voice and to write down everythin g you hear
from it. I encour age you to try it–it may amaze you to find out how
much of it is negativ e and critical, both toward yoursel f and toward
others.
Some of what the critical voice says is blatant. Any time we say
to ourse lves, “Oh, that was so stupid! ” or “I’m so clumsy”  or “I hate
my body,” that’s the critical voice. Oftentimes, though, it learns to be
much more subtle than that. As McKay and Fanning point out,
sometimes the critical voice communicates to us simply with a wash
of feeling that overwhelms us with a sense of self-blame and
inadequacy . It takes practice to relearn how to hear the implied
message and put it back into words. The effort is well worth it,
though, because once you get what the message really is, you can
also hear how irr ational i t is, and y ou can begin to dispute i t.
Since the publication of my previous book, howev er, I’ve come
to realize that the critical voice is not the only problematic aspect of
personal ity that we create out of trauma. There is actual ly a pair of
them that I call the “troublesome twins, ” and the other piece is the
instant gratifier. Its positive purpose is to solve problems and to
make us feel better. Unfortunately , as its name implies, it’s always
looking for a quick fix, and the methods it uses to accomplish its
purpose cr eate f ar mor e problems than they solv e.
The Development of the Critical Voice
In the normal course of child development, the critical voice is
very likely a direct result of social ization, the process through which
children learn how to be acceptable members of their particular
cultures. In Western culture, social ization gener ally begins in earnest
between the first and second  birthda ys. We don’t expect infants to
learn manners, and any potential damage they could cause to
themselv es or their environment is limited by their lack of mobility.
Once they begin walking and talking, though, the importance of
instilling saf e and appr opriate beha vior is much gr eater.
My guess is that the critical voice is born the first time someone
who matters to the toddler says “no no!” and backs it up with action.
Even in normal development , then, the critical voice is born out of
trauma. The words “no no” don’t initially mean anything to a toddler .
They take on meaning when  they’re accompanied by some kind of
negativ e consequence: a pleasur able activity is stopped; a toy is
taken away; the caregiver pulls back, tempor arily withdrawing
warmth and af fection; the chi ld is slapped.
Some of these consequen ces are merely unpleasa nt or
unset tling, while others are deeply frightening. In either case, the
child is motiv ated to avoid them in the future. The way she does that
is to internal ize a schema, a kind of “pictur e” or concept of the
caregiver. (A schema isn’t like a photogr aph. It’s more like a diagram
of the most important features of something. ) If this internal
caregiver can learn to say no before the external one does, the child
can suc cessfully avoid the negativ e consequences.
In the case of the merely unwanted consequences –having a
toy taken away, for example–once the child is successful at changing
his behavior the trauma is essential ly processed and resolved, and
there are probably no seriou s lasting effects. The toy is returned,
and all’s right with the world. Not only that, but in the best possible
outcome, when parents are consistent in the consequences they
impose, the child also comes  away with a positive and empowering
sense of mastery: she can choose her behavior, and therefore she
has the power to forestall these negativ e consequences from
happening. (Or she can decide that the consequences are worth it
this time and do i t anyway!)
But consider what happens when the mother withdraws her
affection: the implied threat is that the child could be in danger of
losing his mother ’s love forever, and he picks up on it. Even though
young children can’t articulate their feelings, they’re normal ly quite
perceptiv e and intuitive, and they grasp much more than adults
typical ly give them credit for. In this case, the child doesn’ t know if
he can ever do enough to win back his mother ’s love. Because he’s
dependent on his parents for all of his physical and emotional needs
–and he knows that he is –the threat is essential ly one of
annihi lation. That’s a terrifying experience and a significant trauma,
one that persists long after the original incident is over. The main
coping mechanism that the child has is dissociation, so the fear
becomes dissociated.
The immediate, short-term effect for the child is very
rewarding–on a conscious level, he no longer feels the fear. But
remember from our earlier discussion that dissociated feelings still
have a significant impact. That, I believe, is one reason that the
critical voice becomes so powerf ul and so strongly negativ e–it
reflects the terr or of not being good enough.
As a side note, how do we know that withdrawal of love has
this kind of negativ e impact? A 2-year-old certainly can’t tell us in
words what he’s thinking or feeling. How do we know that the child
even notices when the parent pulls back in disappr oval? The answer
is that we can see the results. Studies have consistently shown that
frequent use of psychological control, including guilt induction and
withdrawal of love, is associated with depression, guilt, emotional
dependence, low self-esteem, low ego strength, social withdrawal,
and passive, overcontrolled behavior (Barber, 1996). Although many
of these studies were done with older children and adolescents,
there is also evidence that infants are beginning to recogniz e
different emotional expressions – and make corresponding choices
about their beha vior–by their first birthda y (Walker-Andrews, 1997).
Characteristics of the Critical Voice
The first major coalescence of the critical voice into a
discernible “voice,” a discrete and recognizable part of ourselv es,
seems to occur, on average, at about age 4. We know from clinical
experience with dissociativ e identi ty disorder (what used to be called
multiple personal ity disorder) that dissociated parts born out of
trauma tend to stay the age at which they were created until the
originating trauma is resolved. That doesn’ t mean that the critical
voice can’t grow and, in fact, it does change somewhat over time, as
we’ll see. But it does mean that the central essence of the critical
voice tends to think like a 4-year-old. Socialization is well establ ished
by that time, and the 4-year-old’s command of basic language
structur e is almost as good as an adult’s. But a 4-year-old’s
understanding of the world is v ery di fferent from that of an adul t.
Contradictions
One maddenin g characteristic of the critical voice is that it can
hold completely contradictory thoughts or opinions with no appar ent
discomf ort whatsoever. You cannot win an argument with the critical
voice using conventional, adult logic. It will find something to
criticize you for no matter what you do. If you decide to give your
friend a rather expensiv e gift for her wedding, your critical voice will
say that you’re stupidly extravagant; but if you let it talk you into
buying someth ing less expensiv e, it will call you stingy and selfish.
The only healthy way to deal with it is to refuse to argue on its
terms.
When the critical voice holds contradictory opinions or beliefs, it
can flip rapidly  back and forth between them, but it doesn’ t actual ly
ever hold them at the same moment. It was one of my patients who
taught me the enormous healing power of the And. When you hold
two opposing statements with the word “but” in between them, the
second one negates the value or impact of the first: “I try to be
good about my diet, but I just keep screwing up.” In contrast, when
you link such statements with “and” instead of “but,” you’re
acknowledging the whole truth of the matter, allowing both sides to
be equally valid: “My mothe r did the best she could to be a good
parent AND she was intensely and constantly critical.” Interestingly ,
resear ch has suggested that the ability to hold both positive and
negativ e feelings at the same time is associated with healthy coping
and that peopl e who have this ability tend to be more physical ly and
mental ly healthy than those who don’t (Larsen, Hemeno ver, Norris,
& Cacio ppo, 2003). I believe that this finding can be explained by
the power of the And, because the And gives you the larger truth
instead of only one f acet of i t.
Absolute Thinking and Overgeneralization
The critical voice can’t hold the And because, like any 4-year-
old, its thinking is entirely too black-and-white. Something is good or
bad, right or wrong, always or never. It doesn’ t understand
exceptions or extenuating cir cumstances.
The always-nev er dimension of its thinking also causes vast
overgener alization. Instead of calmly acknowledging to ourselv es
that we were five minutes overdue for a meeting this week, we find
ourselv es exclaiming, “I’m always late!” Even worse, the
overgener alization about our behavior slides into global, negativ e
beliefs about ourselv es: “I’m a f ailure.”
Another corollary of its absolute thinking is that the critical voice
has no tolerance for ambigui ty or uncertaint y. Waiting for an answer
is agonizing, so it will often impulsiv ely slam the door on a promising
new relationsh ip or new endea vor before we have a chance to find
out whether i t might actual ly work out.
Wrong-Headed Protection
The critical voice believes that if it calls you a name first, it
won’t hurt as badly when someone else does it to you. This
hypothesis actual ly works to some extent with physical pain, and I
wonder if that’s where the critical voice gets the idea. If you bite
your lip after you’ve stubbed  your toe, the pain impulses from your
lip compete with the pain impulses from your toe and partial ly
obscur e them. That’s why rubbing the toe works, too –the sensation
of rubbing masks the pain messages being sent to y our br ain.
Unfortunately , the same approach does not work with
psychological pain–qui te the contrary. When I allow my critical voice
to call me stupid, I create that schema inside. Then when someone
else calls me stupid, the hurtful message gets in because it has
something to match to. If I weren’t holding that schema, the
message would simply bounce off. I might feel surprised by it, I
might even laugh at it, I might feel sad that this person appar ently
has a low opinion of me, but I wouldn’ t feel hurt.
Try this exercise: Think of something about yoursel f that you
like and that you’re completely confident about. It can be anything–
perhaps you have a good singing voice, you’re tall, you’re a good
cook, you’re a good debater . Now imagine how you’d feel if someone
tried to contradict you. If you’re really completely confident about
this qual ity, nothing the other person sa ys can f aze you.
For John, it was being smart. He knew he was smart, without a
doubt. His critical voice sometimes tried to make him feel bad for not
doing enough (“If you’re so smart, why aren’t you president?”), but
it couldn’t shake his certaint y. He was even a card-carrying member
of Mensa, the high-IQ societ y. So if someone tried to tell him he was
stupid, he did not think, “Gosh! What’s wrong with me?” Instead, his
internal r esponse w as, “I wonder what ’s the mat ter wi th that guy?”
Understanding this particular characteristic of the critical voice
also helps us to understand a basic principle of modern popular
psychology . You’ve probably heard the assertion many, many times
that no one else can make you angry . It’s true. The fact is that no
one can make you feel–or do or say or be–anything if you’re not so
inclined. Of course, someone who knows you well knows where your
“buttons” are. He can choose  to do something knowing that there’s a
high probabi lity that you’ll wind up feeling angry or hurt–or happy,
for that matter. But he can’t actual ly make you feel any of those
feelings. What makes you feel angry or hurt is your own critical
voice. It hears  the negativ e message, takes it in, match es it to a
schema you already hold, and beats you up with it. To be even more
precise, the other person’ s critical voice speaks to yours, and the
better the person knows you, the more accurately his critical voice
will be able to target your internal schemas. But all of the actual
damage comes from your critical voice, your own personal “Trojan
horse. ” (If you remember Greek mythology , the Trojan horse
represents something that defeats you from inside your own walls,
rather than from outside. ) On the positive side, though, the corollary
is that if you were able to clear out all of those old schemas and the
traumas that created them, you wouldn’ t have any buttons left to be
pushed, and no one’ s critical v oice would be able to find a tar get.
Unfortunately , virtual ly all of us have chinks in our armor
somewher e. In my experience, the more unresolved trauma we have
(including everyday trauma), the more vulner able we are to the
machinations of the critical voice, and the more power it has to
distort our thinking. Another of its techniques is to apply strong
filters to our experience–l ike mud-color ed glasses instead of rose-
colored ones. It readily absorbs negativ e information while screening
out positive input. There’s a rule of thumb in popular psychology
that it takes ten positive comments to outweigh one negativ e one.
For people who have an especially powerf ul critical voice, the ratio
may be much higher , to the point that they simply don’t hear
positive input at all–or if they do, they find a way to negat e it. Unlike
John in the example above, they have no certaint y about their good
qualities, only doubts and f ears.
Egocentrism
Psychologist Jean Piaget observ ed that children under the age
of 6 or 7 are naturally egocentric. In the psycholog ical sense,
“egocentric” is not the same thing as “egotistical” or “selfish.” It
refers to the fact that a young child sees himsel f as the center of the
universe and simply isn’t capable of stepping out of that position to
take another person’ s point of view. He’s truly not aware that there
is another point of view: “Ooo , my toe hurts – can’ t you feel it?”
If you have a young child, there’s an easy way to demonstr ate
this characteristic. Get a piece of paper that has a different color or
pictur e on each side. Show both sides of the paper to the child and
make sure that he can accurately name both pictur es or colors. Then
hold up the paper between you so that each of you sees only one
side. Ask the child which one you see. A typical 4-year-old will name
the picture or color that he sees. He literally can’t shift his point of
view to understand that someone else’ s would be di fferent.
An emotional consequence of this cogni tive characteristic is that
children tend to see themselv es as responsible for everything that
happens. If momm y and daddy get divorced, the child believes it’s
because she w as being bad and they wer e fighting o ver her .
This way of thinking dovetails well with the critical voice’s
primary role of protector . It’s a terrible experience to feel helpless,
and our critical voice tries to protect us from such feelings. From its
point of view, it’s often much better to see ourselv es as responsible
for an event than to admit we have no control over it. Unfortunately ,
the natural conclusion of this line of thought is that everything is our
fault. (Of course, being not bother ed by contradictions, the critical
voice is also capable of causing us to feel helpless and incompetent
in other si tuations. )
One serious consequence of egocentrism is that most of us
tend to take things personal ly far too much of the time. We interpr et
things as being about us when they aren’t. An important example of
this thinking is what I call the victim question: “Why did she do that
to me?” A somewhat better question is, “Why did she do that?” The
answer might be that she’s re-enacting a trauma that was done to
her, or that she’s a sadist who has gone over to the dark side–we
may never know. But the point is that the perpetr ator’s behavior tells
us only about her–it tells us nothing about the person on the
receiving end. (On the other hand, the perpetr ator’s behavior may
give us important information about the relationship  between the
two people–mor e on that in the next chapter .)
Another cogni tive conseque nce of egocentrism is that the
critical voice believes in mindr eading, in both directions. Being
unable to entertain a different point of view, your critical voice
believes that it knows what another person is thinking– all negativ e,
of course. If you have doubts about yoursel f, then the other person
must also think you’re incompetent. Think about how many times
you’ve started a sentence with some version of, “I know you’ll think
I’m crazy....” It also believes that the other person knows what
you’re thinking. It’s probably this quality that leads to the rather
peculiar belief, quite prevalent in our culture, that if you care about
me, you’ll know what I want for my birthda y without my having to
tell you. (Since you can read my mind, if you don’t it must be
because you don’t care.) If you stop and think about it, this belief is
clearly irr ational, but that doesn’ t mak e it any less powerf ul.
An Unusual View of Time
Another characteristic of the critical voice is that it doesn’ t have
a concept of linear time. In linear time, time flows in only one
direction. One moment happens after another after another .
Yesterday is gone forever, and tomorr ow hasn’t happened yet. But to
the critical voice, time is nonlinear. All moments exist equal ly in the
present moment –past, present and future are all one. It’s this
characteristic that allows the critical voice to rewrite history so easily.
If you know something today, your critical voice believes that you
should have known it yesterday–because yesterday and today are all
the same thing. If you buy a nonrefundable airplane ticket and the
price goes down two days later, when it’s too late to change it, your
critical voice will beat you up because you should have known that it
was better to wait. (Of cours e, if you had taken the risk to wait, and
the price had gone up, it would have beaten you up just as badly.)
This characteristic causes many people to constantly second guess
themselv es, to revisit their decisions over and over, because the
penal ty for being wrong is very painful. The critical voice causes us
to blame ourselv es for things  that were not our fault and events that
could not ha ve been f oreseen.
Primitive Moral Reasoning
When a 4-year-old thinks about right and wrong, her moral
reasoning isn’t based on internal ized, high moral principles such as a
belief in the sancti ty of all life. Her judgment rests on a much more
primitive basis: the external consequences of a behavior. A behavior
is bad if it causes pain or she gets punished for it; a behavior is good
if it gets her something she wants. Of those two, howev er, avoiding
punishment often seems to be a much stronger motivation for
toddlers and y oung pr eschool chi ldren.
If you stop and think about it, it’s obvious why this would be
true for children who are being abused. Avoiding punishment may
be literally a matter of life and death. Howev er, it has also been
observ ed to be true in many children who are not severely abused.
My guess is that, in our culture, the typical nonabusiv e parent
gener ally doesn’ t require very young children to “earn” basic
necessi ties through good behavior. Even small treats are often given
“just because, ” irrespectiv e of what the child happens to be doing at
the moment. Thus the cause- and-ef fect connection  between
behavior and consequence is likely to be much clearer for negativ e
behaviors and consequences than f or posi tive ones.
As a result, it follows that the main orientation of the critical
voice is punishment, and in order to avoid external punishment, it
becomes very punitive itself. It’s capable of punishing us with deep
feelings of hurt, shame, guilt, embarr assment and even–in at least
some cases –ph ysical symptoms.
In more extreme cases, the critical voice causes us to
contemplate suicide. In its way of thinking, there may be many kinds
of events that are, indeed, worse than death. This is especial ly true
because the typical 4-year-old doesn’ t understand that death is
permanent and irreversible. Cases of pediatric attempted suicide are
rare, fortunately , but when such children are interviewed, they
almost invariably say something like, “I was gonna shoot myself so
when I saw them at school on Monda y they’d be real sorry for
teasing me.” Thus your critical voice can easily believe that it’s
protecting y ou by urging y ou to die.
Hope Phobia and Catastrophizing
The critical voice is also hope-phobic. It doesn’ t want us to
hope because disappointment is so excruciatingly painful. Remember
that the critical voice isn’t the least troubled by inconsistency . Its
reason for existence is to protect us from pain, but it’s perfectly
capable of inflicting pain internally in order to protect us from pain
coming from outside. (Think  back to the example of the stubbed
toe.) It doesn’ t realize that human beings die if they have no hope.
Consequently , it’s very good at catastr ophizing, at predicting the
worst possible outcome.
This quality can have a significant impact on the course of
therapy. Having no hope, the critical voice doesn’ t want change. It
doesn’ t believe that positive change is possible. It doesn’ t want to
try anything new, and it doesn’t believe that the therapist’s methods
can possibly work. From its viewpoint, it’s unproductiv e, unsaf e, and
just plain stupid to go rippin g open painful memories when nothing
can be done about them anyway. Thus, it resists. I’ve come to
believe that everything we call “resistance” in psychother apy, and in
life in gener al, comes from the critical voice. Years ago, resistance
was something  of a dirty word in psychother apy, something for the
therapist to push through or break down. Seeing it in this light,
howev er, helps to remind us of the positive intention underlying
resistance. As wrong-headed as the critical voice’s method s may be,
its essential purpose is to pr otect.
While we’re on the subject, I’d also like to suggest to you that
almost every negativ e though t and feeling you have come s from, or
is mediated by, the critical voice. One major exception to this is the
sadness and grief we feel in response to loss – that’s a natural
response that comes from the heart. Another exception is outrage,
which is our entirely appropriate emotional reaction to the
perception of wrongness in the world. Where rage comes from
personal wounding, outrage is impersonal–i t’s not about us. There
are probably also some fears that arise from natural causes. But as
you begin working on clearing out the old traumas and the feelings
and beliefs that grew out of them, every time you feel hurt, fearful,
angry , guilty, ashamed, or judgmental, you might start from the
premise that y our cri tical v oice is right in the middle of i t.
Rule Making
Another part of the critical voice’s function is to make rules to
govern our thoughts and behavior. Not surprisingly , its rules are
inflexible, and it demands that you obey them. Any time you hear
yoursel f using the word “should” or any variation of it–must, ought,
have to, need to, supposed to, etc.– it’s likely that you’re speaking
from your cri tical v oice.
The more powerf ul our critical voice is, the more stringently and
punitively the rules are enforced. For example, one very common
rule is “Don’ t ask questions. ” If we dig a little more deeply, we’re
likely to find the belief that asking questions makes you look stupid
or weak, which leads to painful humiliation. The purpose of the rule,
therefore, is to protect you from being humiliated. Once establ ished,
rules like this can show up in countless variations and can affect
almost every facet of our everyday lives. For example, one patient
insisted on having her daughter ’s hair cut short even though the
daughter wanted to let it grow out. When we explor ed why the
mother was so adamant, it turned out that long hair requires a
special kind of brush (another rule), she didn’t know where to buy
one, and her critical voice absolutely forbade her to ask questions to
find out. Even without our being aware of it, the critical voice often
controls much of what we feel, believe, and do. The next time you
find yourself doing–or not doing – something without knowing why,
ask yoursel f what rule y our cri tical v oice is enf orcing.
My mother was avant garde in many ways, but she was very
traditional when it came to matters of etiquet te and dress. One of
the most basic fashion rules was that you never wore white shoes
before Memorial Day or after Labor Day, and that rule was deeply
ingrained in me. Even after I had lived in the South for many years,
I simply couldn’ t force my foot into a white shoe before the
prescribed date–no matter that the weather in Georgia gets warm in
early April and stays warm until October . What did I think was going
to happen? I was going to become a social pariah? My toes were
going to rot and fall off? (And I know I wasn’t the only one with this
issue. The fashion industry had to wean us all off by inventing a
passion f or “winter whi te.”)
Irrational Thinking
Notice from these examples that critical voice beliefs and rules
are almost always irrational. That doesn’ t make them any less
powerf ul–qui te the contrary. They’re another good example of Dr.
Jones’ assertion about maladaptiv e behavior (in this case, mental
behavior): the beliefs and rules served a positive purpose when they
were first created, but in adulthood when they no longer apply, they
become incon venient at best and sev erely maladaptiv e at worst.
Magical thinking also falls into this category . The human mind
seems to be hardwired to see patterns in objects and events, even
when they don’t actual ly exist. The constel lations are an example of
this tendency . When the ancient Greeks looked at the constel lation
called Orion, they connected the dots and saw the figure of a hunter .
Many other cultures have seen a similar figure. In actual ity, these
stars have no physical relationship to each other at all–the most
distant membe r of the constel lation is more than a thousand light
years f arther a way from us than the closest one is.
Magical thinking causes people to attribute much more power
to thoughts and wishes than they actual ly have. As a result,
children–and even adults – sometimes have trouble distinguishing
between thoughts and feelings on the one hand and actual
behaviors on the other. If a young child gets angry at his father and
yells that he wishes someth ing bad would happen, and then his
father has an accident, the child genuinely believes that his wish
caused harm to his father. The reverse is also true: the critical voice
believes that if we don’t think about something, then it isn’t real, it
didn’t happen.
This kind of thinking is a natural feature of a 4-year-old’s
cogni tion but, like all of the other critical voice features, it can wreak
havoc when we allow it to color our judgment as adults. It causes us
to draw conclusions about cause and effect that are completely
erroneous. I apologiz e if I’m stepping on toes here but, in my
opinion, the belief that “everything happens for a reason” is an
example of this kind of thinking. In contrast, I offer this thought to
my patients: if I spend six months planning a garden party and it
rains that day, it didn’t ruin everyone else’s plans just to teach me
some kind of lesson. I’m not that important.
The Instant Gratifier
The instant gratifier is like a mirror twin of the critical voice–the
other side of the same coin–and has many of the same
characteristics. It’s not bother ed by contradictions, it thinks in black
and white terms, and it has no conception of long-term
consequences. It’s at least as impulsiv e as the critical voice–often
more obviously so. Using the same primitive level of moral
reasoning, something is bad if it brings pain or punishment; it’s good
if it brings pleasur e or gets r ewarded.
Howev er, this is where the other side of the coin comes in: the
job of the critical voice is to avoid pain, whereas the job of the
instant gratifier is to replace your pain with something that feels
good – and to do so as quickly as possible.
Being at that same 4-year-old level of thinking, it doesn ’t look
for sophisticat ed solutions. It doesn’ t encour age you to work for
world peace or to find joy in helping others. Its notions of pleasur e
are much more direct–eating (especial ly foods that are sweet or
fatty), sleeping, taking drugs, thrill-seeking. And because of its
absolute thinking, it has no notion of moder ation, so if a little is
good, more is better. “Feeling bad? Have some ice cream. Eat the
whole carton! ”
The Critical Voice over Time
Finally, we should note that there’s a second major node of
critical-voice thinking that seems to develop around early
adolescence. This aspect of the critical voice is recognizable by its
attitude–opposi tional, defiant , sarcastic, and flippant. The resistance
contributed by this side of the critical voice has the same defiant
quality to it.
You create the critical voice as a young child becaus e you
believe that you can’t surviv e knowing and feeling all of your fears
and traumas. The critical voice continues to see you that way–as a
child who will be destroyed if you try to take on the crushing burden
of your memor ies. And because it genuinely believes that, it does its
best to mak e sure that y ou continue to bel ieve it as wel l.
Imagine a young queen–someone similar to Queen Victoria of
England, perha ps–who comes to the throne before she’s legally of
age. She would have a regent appointed to help her rule. But the
regent, being a powerf ul man himsel f, might well believe that he
could do a much better job of running the country than a silly little
girl. He might convince her to give him more and more power , so
that she could be free to play and enjoy hersel f. He couldn’ t insult
her to her face, but he might send her subtle messages that she
really wasn’t capable of handling matters of state. If this process
started early enough, she would believe him – and she might
continue to believe him even after she reached the age of majori ty.
She would be the queen in name, but he would rule the country in
fact.
The critical voice often holds this kind of world view. You’ve
given it a great deal of powe r, and it feels that it knows much better
than you do how your life should be run. The fact that you, as an
adult, have all kinds of emotional, intellectual, social, and financial
resour ces that you didn’t have before doesn’ t make any difference to
it. Its way works, it says –never mind the distressing, even
devastating, symptoms that you’re experiencing– and no other way
of doing things can be trusted as saf e.
One aspect of the healing, then, is for you to remember that
you are the queen (or king) of your inner world and to take back
your power from the critical voice. That is, literally, an empowering
experience and, ultimately , a deeply satisfying one. In the beginning,
though, it can be very frightening. That’s why it’s helpful to begin
therapy with techniques that give you alternativ e strategies for
controlling the traumatic material and for standing up to the critical
voice. W e’ll be talking mor e about that in later chapters.
CHAPTER 5
When the Cri tical V oice I s in
Charge
IN MY PREVIOUS BOOK on dissociation (Karjala, 2007), I wrote
about the more severe forms of trauma and their consequences,
specifically post-traumatic stress disorder and dissociati ve identi ty
disorder (DID, the condi tion that used to be called multiple
personal ity disorder). I explained that a DID system is made up of
the core and the dissociated parts that the core creates. The core is
similar to Freud’s concept of the ego. It’s the original person who is
born in the body and holds our unique sense of “I/me. ” The
dissociated parts serve a variety of different purposes – for example,
they hold trauma memories out of the core’s conscious awareness or
interact wi th the outside world in particular w ays.
We all use dissociation as a coping mechanism, and we all have
parts and aspects of ourselv es. The primary difference that
distinguishes someone with DID is that there’s at least partial
amnesia in the system –that is, a part can take executiv e control for
a period of time, and when the part goes back inside and the core
(or another part) comes back out, she has no memor y for that
interv al. That ’s what we cal l “losing time. ”
I also mentioned in the previous book that there are two
common patterns seen in DID. In one pattern, the core is “up front”
in the body, in contact with the outside world and in executiv e
control–mor e or less. In this case, she may be complete ly unaware
of the inside world, at least on a conscious level. In the second
pattern, the core becomes exhausted, often when she’s quite young.
She feels completely overwhelmed and unable to cope with what’s
happening to her. In response, she hides inside. Sometimes she
remains awake and aware of the outside world, even though she
rarely interacts with it directly. More often, though, she creates one
or more parts to handle the outside world; then, findin g that she
feels safer when they’re in control, she gives them increasingly
greater control and authori ty. As they become more powerf ul, they
may encourage the core to hide deep inside, even to go to sleep for
long periods of time.
The critical voice (and its companion, the instant gratifier) are
as close as a non-DID person comes to having a dissociated part.
We can also see the same two typical patterns in the relationship
between the adul t core and the tr oublesome twins.
The First Pattern: The Core Out Front
The more common pattern, in my experience, is the one in
which the core is out front and the critical voice exerts its influence
from inside. In fact, the critical voice may operate almost entirely
from a subconscious level, and many people are unaware that it
even exists until it’s called to their attention. That doesn’ t mean that
it has little power, howev er. Quite the contrary–the less aware we
are, the more it’s able to control us without our realizing it. The
more we drag its machinations into consciousness, the more we’re
able to tak e our power back.
Remember that we create the critical voice in the first place to
serve as a protector . An emotional ly healthy person who has minimal
unresolved trauma feels less need for an internal protector , so he
gives it much less power . In such a person, the critical voice can
serve as a guide that supports sel f-direction and ethical action.
Unfortunately , not many people are as thoroughly healthy as
that. For most of us, the critical voice retains a greater degree of
power . When life is relatively smooth, it remains in the backgr ound.
Although it natters on almost incessantly in its negativ e, pessimistic
way, we only become aware of it when it makes an unusually sharp
comment about ourselv es or someone else that’s loud enough to be
heard or felt on a conscious level. But the more unresolved trauma
we’re carrying, the more power the critical voice has in gener al. And
whenev er we’re frightened, hurt, stressed, depressed, threatened,
anxious, sick or in physical pain, we (subconsciously) yell to our
protector for help. Just like the villagers in an old movie when the
gunman/w arlord/knight errant rides in and promises to vanquish the
desper ados, we give it all the power it asks for if it will only save us
from the pain and danger .
The fact is that life has ups and downs. The healthy way to deal
with this is to revel in the good times, when you have them, so that
you refresh and renew yoursel f for whatev er challenges may come
next. But that’s not the way the critical voice thinks. Because it’s
hope-phobic, it believes that life is always bad and difficult. When
you’re in a good time, it’s anticipating the worst. It steals all of the
joy out of the present moment by focusing on the pain it’s sure is
coming. Instea d of being able to appreciate accompl ishme nt or good
fortune, it’s looking ahead to the next bad time. If you successfully
complete one level of education or training, you’re not allowed to
feel proud of yoursel f–it’s already warning you not to get a swelled
head, because  you’ll probably fail the next one. In fact, combining
the catastrophizing with its nonlinear view of time, the bad future is
now, so the failure isn’t just a vague possibi lity in the distan ce–it’s
also happening now.
Then when you do hit a hard time, it takes that as confirmation
that, yes, life is always bad, and you will always lose what little good
you’re vouchsaf ed. On top of that, because past, present and future
are all one, it beats you up for not having seen and prevented the
bad time. And contrary to Tennyson’s sentiment that “’tis better to
have loved and lost,” as far as the critical voice is concerned, having
had a little good and lost it is much worse than not ever having
known it at all–it was better when you didn’t know what you were
missing. It’s a lot more likely to subscribe to the philosoph y that
“ignor ance is bl iss.”
Again because  of its nonlinear view of time, the critical voice
causes us to react as if past trauma is also happening now. When
something brings an unresolved trauma to our conscious mind, or
even near the surface, we begin to think and feel and act as if it’s
present -day reality. If we felt abandoned or betrayed in the past, for
example, we may view our new partner with suspicion and doubt
when there’s no real reason to do so. We may even drive him or her
away and cause the relationship to fail–because the critical voice is
sure that it will fail, and it’s just too painful to wait for the inevitable.
If we were embarrassed about looking dumb as children, it may be
unsaf e to show any ignorance by asking questions – so the critical
voice steals our wonder and curiosi ty as wel l as our jo y.
Another way of looking at this is that the critical voice keeps
putting us into flashback. As I explained earlier, when we’re in
flashback, we aren’t simply remembering an event–we’re reliving it.
We look like adults on the outside, but we begin to feel like wounded
and frightened children, and it affects our behavior and decision-
making.
To the extent that we allow the critical voice to take charge and
color our thinking, then, we tend to see the world as a disappointing
and danger ous place and ourselv es as young and vulner able. The
stronger its grip, the less we’re able to be genuinely intimate or to
admit another into our private thoughts, because the critical voice
tells us that if the other perso n really knew us, they’d run away. The
stronger its grip, the less we’re able to show or even feel our more
tender feelings. One example I’ve seen in recent years that
especial ly disturbs me is something that happens at weddings. At
the moment when the bride and groom feed each other a bite of
cake, some couples seem to find it funny to mash the cake into each
other’s face. A gestur e meant to symbol ize a loving promise to
support and nurtur e each other becomes instead an instance of
slapstick humor or ev en subtle aggr ession.
The tendency to let the critical voice take charge can also
become a down ward spiral that may be very difficult to break. The
critical voice fills us with pessimism; the more discour aged we feel,
the more depressed and hopeless we become; the more depressed
we feel, the more power we give to our protector , thinking it will
rescue us; and the more power the critical voice has, the more its
negativ e beliefs come to seem l ike incontr overtible f act.
The Second Pattern: The Critical Voice Out
Front
If you’re reading this, it’s unlikely that this second pattern
describes you. The critical voice doesn’ t read self-help books. At the
same time, you almost certainly know at least one perso n who fits
this description very well. Perhaps it’s one of your parents, or a boss,
or an irascible neighbor . In this case, the core of the person is deep
inside, so the only part of him or her you ever meet is the critical
voice. It does its best to masquerade as an adult, but you can often
pick up on a child or adolescent quality in the way the person thinks
and acts.
Thinking back to the characteristics of the critical voice
described in the previous chapter , the most obvious characteristic of
people like this is that they’re critical and judgmental. They rarely
have anything positive to say. They exhibi t selectiv e memory and
selectiv e perception geared toward negativi ty and self-protection.
They’re gener ally pessimistic, and they’re not fazed by evidence to
the contrary – in their minds, it just means that the inevitable has
been postponed.
They may often appear greedy and self-focused. I say “appear,”
though, because their behavior often seems motiv ated, not by the
pleasur e of acquiring or even the pleasur e of besting someone else,
but by fear. A corollary of their pessimism is that the critical voice
sees the world as a place of scarcity, not abundance. It constantly
feeds the fear that there’s not going to be enough for them, so they
hoard and jealously pr otect what they can get.
Much of their thinking is black and white; something is either
right or wrong, and they struggle with ambigui ty or uncertaint y.
They tend to hold rigid rules and expectations and can be quite
harsh when those are not met. When they meet with opposi tion,
they’re more likely to respond with bullying tactics than with
negotiation or compr omise. At the extreme, they can become
emotional ly and ev en ph ysical ly abusiv e.
It may seem as if they think they’re “all that” but, in my
experience, the harsh criticism overflows onto others around them
because they themselv es are full up to the eyebrows with it and
can’t hold any more. As a result, blame-shi fting is anothe r common
characteristic of this kind of person. Whatev er happens, it must be
somebody else’ s fault.
If you do know people like this, you probably dislike them
intensely –or at least have very mixed feelings –and that’s
understandable. It may help you to deal with them better, howev er,
if you keep that last thought in mind and take a somewh at different
viewpoint. My rule of thumb is that, whatev er they show toward
others, what’s going on inside is ten times worse. That doesn’ t
excuse the abusiv e beha vior, but i t does put i t in a di fferent light.
A Third Pattern: The Instant Gratifier Out
Front
In addition to the two patterns that parallel those commonly
found in DID, there’s also a third pattern. It can be thought of as a
variation of the second, because the adult core is again inside. In
this case, howev er, the instant gratifier is up front and making a lot
of the decisions. People like this tend to be impulsiv e and pleasur e-
seeking. At the beginning of a relationship , they can come  across as
adventurous, exciting, uninhibi ted and fun. But they tend to be short
on patience and persistence– and adult notions of responsibi lity, for
that matter. Parents of young children often remark that having a
spouse l ike this is often l ike having an extr a child to tak e care of.
CHAPTER 6
The Critical Voice in Daily Life
NOW THAT WE HAVE a general understanding of the critical voice
and its functioning, we can look at some more specific examples of
how i t mani fests in our dai ly lives.
Trust
Our use of language is often invaded by the critical voice. For
example, we commonly exclaim, “You make me so angry! ” But that’s
a bit of a smokescreen. As we discussed earlier, no one can make
another person feel anything–i t’s your own critical voice that creates
the negativ e feeling.
The same kind of distortion shows up when we talk about trust.
When you say to someone, “I trust you,” what you probably mean is,
“I’m counting on you not to hurt or disappoint me.” You’re
expressing a wish, a hope about this person’ s behavior. And you are
pinning at least some of y our happiness on i t.
But that’s actual ly another smokescreen. Trust doesn’ t reside in
the other person. Trust is a bet I make with myself that I can
accurately pr edict someone’ s beha vior.
Mary tells her friend Susan something in confidence and
expects her not to tell anyone else. She finds out later that
Susan did tell someone, and she feels hurt and angry. But
looking more closely , only part of her anger is at Susan for
“breaking her trust.” The rest of her anger is at hersel f for
getting it wrong. F or being so stupid .
Remember that one of the basic principles discussed earlier is
that we always make the best choices that we can with the
information that we have at the moment. The same holds here.
Mary makes a judgment about her friend’ s probable behavior based
on what she knows at the moment –about Susan specifically, about
human behavior in gener al, whatev er seems to apply. If she’s being
honest with hersel f, she acknowledges that she’s making a decision
about what she wants to do with regard to this friend. Susan is not
coercing or torturing or blackmailing her in any way; what Mary says
or does –or not–is entirely under her voluntary control in this
situation. She decides, as best she can.
If Mary is really on the ball, she even thinks through the
possible conse quences of telling Susan this confidentia l information
(it might make them closer friends, she might inadv ertently or
deliberately reveal it to others) or not telling her (Mary loses
whatev er insight Susan might share with her about it, no one else
finds out). Furthermor e, she acknowledges that she’s willing to
accept whatev er the consequences of her decision are. Of course, if
she’s being completely fair to hersel f at the same time, she also
acknowledges that she can’t know everything and doesn’ t have a
crystal ball–at least not one that works. Stuff happens, and a good
bit of it is beyond our control. Because she remembers that, she
doesn’ t need to heap criticism on hersel f for being wrong if her
friend does something she didn’ t anticipate.
What all of this is leading up to is that deciding to tell her friend
this information  has little to do with trusting Susan. It has everything
to do with being able to trust hersel f–first, being able to trust that
she can make reasonably good judgments about people and,
second, being able to trust that she can surviv e the results of her
choice. This includes both external and internal results. She’s
thoughtf ul about the degree of risk and doesn’ t put more on the
table than she can afford to lose (external consequence) . She also
accepts responsibi lity for her decision without allowing her critical
voice to beat her up when things don’t go the way she expects
(internal consequence).
The problem is that the critical voice is not fair, reasonable or
rational. It does think that we should know everything, and it holds
us responsible for everything that happens. Far worse than losing
trust in a friend is losing trust in our own judgment. The more
powerf ul Mary’s critical voice is, the more she’s likely to come to
believe that she’s a terrible judge of character. And the corollary is
that she’s clearly not safe going out into the world because she’s too
dumb to tell who can be trusted and who can’t. In that direction lies
agoraphobia, social isolation and loneliness –but in the eyes of the
critical v oice, that ’s what ’s safe.
Relationships, Closure and Reconciliation
There’s an important corollary to what we’ve been discussing
about trust, and feelings in gener al: each of us is responsible for
dealing with our own feelings. No one else can heal them for us.
There’s a common belief in our culture that, if someone has wronged
us, it’s an important part of the healing process to confront that
person. Some people even go so far as to say that it’s the only way
they can ever be happy again. But this, too, is a myth. Closur e
occurs entirely within ourselv es – and that’s a very good thing. If a
woman was abused as a child, for example, and if she believes that
the only way she can be at peace is to get an apology from her
abuser , then she’s giving the power for her happiness into the hands
of the last person on earth who should have it. Fortunately , the
reality is that she can heal completely with no reference to the
perpetr ator at al l.
Going back to the previous example of giving information to a
friend, Mary can do all of the internal work needed to repair her
trust and confidence in hersel f. But there’s another important part of
this pictur e: what does she do about her r elationship wi th Susan?
The fact that Mary’s feelings are her own responsibi lity doesn’t
mean that she simply ignores what Susan did. That’s a new piece of
information she didn’t have before, and it’s appropriate and
necessary that she weigh it in when making her decision about what
do to next. Let’s say Susan does reveal her private information, and
Mary’s reaction is to feel angry . Mary may choose not to say
anything to her–in which case that choice and its consequences are
also her responsibi lity. Her critical voice will be yelling that Susan
should already know how she feels and why, but her adult core is
aware that the ball is still in her court. Susan can’t do anything about
a problem i f she doesn’ t know that i t exists.
But suppose Mary chooses to tell Susan how she feels about
her behavior. She also tells her what degree of importance it has for
her–trivial, middl ing, highly significant –remember , she’s not
expecting Susan to read her mind. Now the ball is in Susan’s court.
She can choose to work on changing the behavior, or she can work
with Mary on a compr omise, or she can ignor e what Mary said.
Whichev er way Susan goes, her choice gives Mary important
information about her and about their relationship . It tells Mary
something about what Susan values and where their relationship fits
into her scheme of things.
Reconci liation is the process of repairing a relationship , and one
person can’t do that singleh andedly . The metaphor of building a
bridge is especial ly apt here: you can’t build a bridge up from one
side and down to the other. It doesn’ t have to be built exactly
equal ly from both directions, but the foundations need to be firmly
placed on both banks.
If Susan  chooses not to rebuild the bridge between them, then
part of Mary’s job is–again–not to allow the critical voice to define
the meaning of this event. It will be telling her that if Susan doesn’ t
value her, then it must be because she’s not worth it; if she tries to
stand up for hersel f, she’ll always wind up alone; she’s better off not
trying, because  she’s just going to get hurt again; etc. Instead of
buying in to those beliefs, she can remember that Susan’ s behavior
is about Susan, not her, and she can simply let hersel f be sad for the
loss.
Resignation vs. Acceptance
Since you’re reading a self-help book, the odds are good that
you’re familiar with the Serenity Prayer: “God grant me the serenity
to accept the things I cannot change, courage to change the things I
can, and wisdom to know the difference.” The first time I heard it, I
admit, I though t it was rather hokey. Since then, howev er, I’ve come
to appr eciate the pr ofound wisdom that those l ines contain.
The critical voice isn’t capable of acceptance. The best it can
manage is a kind of grit-your-teeth resignation, which is not at all
the same thing. Resignation  leaves us with feelings of defeat and
hopelessness, and often with a deep sense of shame that we
weren’t good enough or strong enough or smart enough to fix the
problem.
In contrast, the ability to reach a state of true acceptance is an
essential comp onent of mental health. One of the most poignant
examples is watching a loved one running pell mell for the edge of a
cliff–out of addiction or mental illness – and knowing that there is
nothing  we can realistical ly do to stop them. The truth is that we
can’t control everything. Genuine acceptance is being able to sit with
that terrible feeling of powerlessness and still be okay within
ourselv es. And perhaps the ultimate acceptance is being fully aware
of our own mortal ity and being able to live richly, without going into
either denial or despair –not in spite of that knowledge, but because
of it.
Personality Disorders
The Diagnostic and Statis tical Manual, mentioned earlier,
contains a section on what are called the personal ity disorders. If
you’re not a clinician, you may not be familiar with that term, but
you’ve almost certainly heard about the specific disorders, which
include obsessiv e-compulsiv e, dependent, narcissistic, paranoid,
histrionic, borderline, etc. Most people don’t reach the level of
intensi ty that would warrant a diagnosis of personal ity disorder, but
in lesser form they can also be thought of simply as common
personal ity styles that describe pr etty much ev eryone.
What distinguis hes one style from another is the type (or types)
of coping mechanisms the person predominantly emplo ys. That
gives each style its particular “flavor.” The characteristics that define
each style can take both positive and negativ e forms. These
characteristics start out as adaptiv e coping strategies, but in
response to stress and trauma they can become exagger ated and
maladaptiv e. For example, an obsessiv e-compulsiv e perso n tends to
be punctual, responsible and detail oriented, but under stress he
may become rigid and narrow-minded, unable to see the forest for
the trees. A histrionic personal ity is often outgoing, spontaneous and
enthusiastic but, when traumatiz ed, can become attention seeking,
impulsiv e and o verly dr amatic.
Most people are not purely one style or another –they have a
blend of different styles. At first glance, one might think that having
characteristics from several of these styles would be terribly
unheal thy, like having several diseases at once. In reality, though,
the person who is a purer type has a narrower, more limited range of
coping mechanisms, which makes him more vulner able to adverse
circumstances.
Using the concepts I’ve been describing in previous chapters, I
also like to think of these styles in terms of who has the power . For
example, people who tend to be obsessiv e-comp ulsive or
emotional ly dependent fit the first pattern--the core is out front, but
he or she is heavily influenc ed by the critical voice from inside. In
contrast, people who are more paranoid are likely to fit the second
pattern, in which the critical voice is out front. Narcissists  strike me
as a bit more complex; the critical voice again seems to be out front,
but with instant the gratifier barely hidden below the surface.
Histrionic personal ities fit the third pattern, with the instant gratifier
in control. In borderline personal ities, it seems as if the twins are
both out front running the show, and the adult core is nowher e to be
seen.
Parenting
We talked earlier about the idea that the critical voice believes
that we can read other people’ s minds and vice versa, so it projects
our thoughts and perceptions  onto the other person. Another way of
saying essential ly the same thing is that it doesn’ t have good
boundaries. It ’s fair to sa y that i t doesn’ t know what boundaries ar e.
One curious, and possibly universal, manifestation of boundary
failure is the phenomenon called identi fication. This phenomenon is
not based on affection or respect; it has only to do with seeing
ourselv es “the same as” the other in some respect. Not surprisingly ,
it’s common to identi fy most strongly with our same-sex parent, then
our opposi te-sex parent, then other family members. Identification
can be strengthened by input from others, as when Aunt Sophie
exclaims, “Oh, Johnn y, you’re just like your father! ” Or Johnny may
have seen her glance at him and mutter, “The apple doesn’ t fall far
from the tr ee.”
Once establ ished, identi fication then works in both directions:
to the extent that we’ve identified with another person –or family,
ethnic group, organization, country , idea– we feel and act as if that
person’ s attributes and behaviors are our own. Have you ever felt
embarr assed by what a family member did, even though you had
nothing to do with it? Proud of the accompl ishments of an Olympic
athlete, though you’ve never made a contribution to your national
Olympic commi ttee?
Identification is by no means limited to children. Parents also
identi fy with their offspring.  And since the critical voice and the
instant gratifier have poor boundaries, the more control they have
over the adult core, the more likely the core is to show signs of poor
boundaries as well, including excessiv e identi fication. For parents,
that often means behaving as if their children are extensions of
themselv es instead of individuals in their own right.
Diana Baumrind’ s (1967) classic resear ch on parenting
described three major patterns of child rearing: authoritarian,
permissiv e, and authori tative. As with the personal ity disorders,
parents are not always pure types, but we can look at them in terms
of broad-brush  categories. And as we also did with the personal ity
disorders, we can take a fresh look at these patterns and see them
in terms of who’ s in char ge.
Authori tarian parents tend to be demanding and to hold high
expectations for their children’s performance. At the same time,
they’re often critical and emotional ly distant. They set rigid rules and
emplo y harsh punishments, even for small infractions. They expect
unquestioning obedience, and any rule-br eaking is often taken as a
personal affront. Howev er, they may bend or break their own rules
when it suits them. It’s easy to recogniz e the critical voice at work
here. This is another reflection of the second pattern, with the
critical voice out front and the core hiding or asleep inside. If you
have a parent like this, it’s possible that you’ve rarely, if ever, met his
or her core. Children of authori tarian parents often grow up to be
bullies themse lves (with their own critical voice out front) or
potential victims of further bullying (with a weakened, damaged core
out front and the powerf ul critical v oice just behind).
Overly permissiv e parents are the polar opposi tes of
authori tarian parents. They’re typical ly warm and loving but also
overindulgent. If they set rules, they tend to be very inconsistent
about enforcing them. As a result, their children’s behavior is often
ill-manner ed, entitled and bratty. But they expect other adults to be
equal ly tolerant and indulge nt, and they can be quite fierce in
defending their children’s “rights. ” In this case, it’s the instant
gratifier out front–at least as far as the children are concerned.
(These parents may not be nearly as indulgent for themselv es.)
Seeing the children as extensions of the parent, the instant gratifier
wants to protect them from experiencing any kind of pain or
frustration and to make them feel good by providing whatev er their
hearts desire. The more the instant gratifier believes that the parent
was depriv ed in his or her own childhood– whether that’s objectiv ely
true or not–the stronger the motiv ation may be to make sure that
the children are not depriv ed of anything. Another variation may
occur in the case of divorce, when the noncustodial parent becomes
a “sugar daddy (or momm y).” The parent is afraid of losing the
child’s love, so the instant gratifier tries to ease the fear by buying
that lo ve with gifts and special activi ties.
One verbal expression that has (unfortunately) become quite
common is to end a sentence with “okay” –as in, “Johnn y, it’s time
for you to go clean your room –okay?” This expression clearly
implies that Johnn y has the final say in the matter, and he gets that.
When he says no, or simply  ignores it–and most children will, at
least some of the time–his parents are left in an uncomf ortable one-
down position. At that point, some parents raise their voices and
escalate the situation to a confrontation. Others wind up bargaining
to get the child to do what he was supposed to do anyway (and
inadv ertently reinforce the undesir able behavior). In either case,
what started out as a simple directive becomes an unnecessary
power struggle.
An extreme variation of the overindulgent parent is the
“helicopter parent,” so called because they tend to hover. Parents
like this have been known to call their children every morning at
college to be sure they wake up on time. They visit their children’s
teachers – even their college professors – to demand that grades be
raised. There are instances in which they’ve even accompanied their
twent y-something children to job interviews. Like other permissiv e
parents, they want to protect their children from pain and help them
feel good. In this case, though, there seems to be another powerf ul
driving factor: a very deep fear (created by the critical voice, of
course) that their children will fail–and probably , by extension, that
they themselv es will have failed as parents. They love their children,
but the critical voice seems to have zero trust that the children can
succeed on their own.
A more subtle form of the helicopter style is the overly helpful
parent. Consider this example:
Johnn y is five years old and is trying hard to learn to tie his
shoe. His mother watches him struggl ing for a minute or two.
Then, not wanting him to be frustrated, she rushes over and
ties the laces f or him .
Although Johnn y’s mother is entirely well-meaning, this action does
three things, none of them good. It prevents Johnn y from having an
eventual success experience . It prevents him from learning to be
persistent and to tolerate frustration. And worst, it communicates to
him that she doesn’ t believe he can do it. By protecting him from
brief frustration, her instant gratifier has actual ly expos ed him to
much mor e frustration and sel f-doubt down the l ine.
Authori tative parents combine the better qualities of the other
types while avoiding the major pitfalls. Like permissiv e parents,
they’re warm, loving and supportiv e. At the same time, they
communicate high standar ds for their children. They set clear, firm
rules and boundaries, and the rules are enforced consistently but not
inflexibly . Their children are often encour aged to express their
opinions and to state their case for an exception to the rules but not
allowed to argue interminab ly once the parent has said no. The
typical result of this style is that the children grow up to be
responsible and self-directed, assertiv e and able to stand up for their
own rights whi le also r espectf ul of the rights of others.
Remembering the idea that the critical voice is born out of
trauma, think back to Janof f-Bulman’ s concept of shattered
assumptions. What protects and inoculates us against trauma is the
opposi te of what creates it: reasonably intact beliefs that the world
is benevolent and safe, the world is meaningf ul and fair, and the self
is worth y.
One thing that helps children feel safe is to know that there’s an
adult in charge who can provide for them and can protect them, not
only from external dangers, but from their own confusing impulses
and feelings. Parents who try to be “pals” with their children may be
fun in the moment, but they’re acting more like children themselv es
than like strong, competent  adults. As a repetitive pattern, that’s
anything but comforting. When parents are overly lax in keeping
good boundaries, children will often keep testing the boundaries
until they find them. In contrast, even when they protest the rules,
it’s often clear that they find the limits reassuring. Perhaps you
remember a time when you begged and stomped to be allowed to
do something your friends were pressuring you to do but were
secretly glad that y our par ents said no?
Consistency is another factor that helps children feel safe. If the
rules don’t apply to them, there’s no guarantee that they apply to
anyone else, either. It also seems to be key in helping children to
feel that the world is meaningful and fair. Consistent rules and
consequences giv e children a sense of structur e and pr edictabi lity.
In order to develop a sense that they are worth y, children need
to have experiences in which they feel competent and capable.
Criticism and belittling obviou sly undermine a child’s belief in his self-
worth, but so does overprotectiveness. At the age of three or four, it
may be fine that no one really keeps score in the soccer game and
every child gets a trophy for running around the field and having
fun. But beyond that age, children know when an award is deserv ed
or not. It may be frustrating or painful in the moment to lose a
game, but if everyone gets rewarded, then no one has merit. As
illustrated in the example of Johnn y above, being overprotectiv e
does even worse than preventing the child from feeling worth y–it
sends the message that he’s incompetent to handle the task or the
situation.
Perfectionism, Procrastination and Avoidance
The critical voice is a perfectionist. To the extent that we’re
under its control, we feel pressure to get things exactly right the first
time. And yet many perfectionists are also procrastinators. How can
those two tendencies coexist, when they seem to be pulling in
opposi te directions?
The answer , I suggest, lies in the avoidance paradigm. To
understand that, we’ll need to take a bit of a side trip. If you’ve ever
taken a gener al psychology class, you’ll probably remember Pavlov’s
dogs. Using dogs as experimental subjects, Ivan Pavlov discovered a
phenomenon called classical condi tioning. He first noticed that dogs
would begin to salivate at the sight of the food bowl, even before
the food was put in front of them. He then tried introducing a
neutral stimulus, such as a bell, before presenting the food. He
found that, within a fairly short time, the dogs began to salivate to
the sound of the bel l.
Pavlov also studied the opposi te process, called extinction. He
found that if he repeatedly rang the bell without following it with the
food, the sal ivation r esponse gr adual ly faded out, or extinguished.
The avoidance  paradigm starts out in a similar way but adds a
significant wrinkle. Imagine a box, perhaps 14 by 18 inches. It has a
low barrier across the middle of it, like a miniatur e tennis court. The
floor is a metal mesh through which a mild electric shock can be
sent to each side separ ately. There’s also a light bulb on the wall at
each end of the box. A rat is placed in the box on one side of the
barrier . The light on that side is turned on, and then the electric
shock. The rat scampers, squeaks, pees and quivers –all of the
things rats do when they’re frightened. Eventual ly it jumps over the
barrier and discovers that the shock is gone. Often within just a few
trials, the rat learns to jump the barrier as soon as the light comes
on, bef ore it feels the shock.
One thing that’s different about this design is that the relief
from the physical discomf ort is a powerf ul reinforcement, an element
not typically present in classical condi tioning. Even after the rat
learns to jump quickly , before it has a chance to feel the shock, the
reinforcement continues, because the relief from the fear is at least
as powerf ul as r elief from the actual shock.
Another important difference is that the avoidance response is
very difficult to extinguish–b ecause it continues to be reinforced by
the relief. Remember that in the standar d extinction design, the
experimenter would turn on the light without turning on the shock.
But in the avoidance design, the rat doesn’ t stay around long
enough to find out that there’s no shock. It jumps from one side of
the box to the other as soon as the light turns on–and if the light
keeps coming on, i t will keep jumping unti l it drops from exhaustion.
Avoidance is a tool of the instant gratifier. If the thought of
something makes us anxious , the instant gratifier works hard to put
it out of mind or to distract us with some other activity. Let’s say that
you have a report to do. The critical voice, as usual, is telling you
that anything less than stellar is a failure, so you have a nagging
fear that you can’t possibly do a good enough job. The solution from
the instant gratifier: Go play video games! If that’s too frivolous,
walk the dog, text a friend, help your daughter with her homework.
Those are all important, and you can always get back to the report
later. The higher the pressure to do A work on the report, and the
more successful the avoidance is, the better the relief from the
anxiet y feels, and the mor e likely you are to k eep doing i t.
Avoidance has another advantage as well. Eventual ly, you get
to the point that you have no choice left–the report is due tomorr ow.
But now you can tell yoursel f that you have to settle for just getting
it done, even if it’s not perfect. In other words, it allows you to make
an end run around the critical voice’s perfectionist standar ds. And
you can always tell yoursel f that you could have gotten an A if only
you had had mor e time.
There is potential ly a very high price to be paid for avoidance,
howev er. When you’ve been wounded or traumatiz ed, the natural
inclination is to flee anything  that seems like a similar situation, that
triggers memories or feelings from the earlier event. But just like the
rat, if you don’t stick around long enough to see that the situation
has changed, you never have the chance to face and overcome your
fear.
Difficulties with Dieting, Exercise and Other
Good Habits
The troublesom e twins, acting as a tag team, can have a great
deal to do with sabotaging our efforts toward self-improvement.
Let’s take diet and exercise as an example. The pattern often goes
something like this: First, the critical voice tells you that you’re fat
and unattractive. Of course, it also tells you that it’s no use trying to
make things better, becaus e you’ll always fail. But you finally
overcome that message and start on a diet and exercise program.
It’s not much fun, you’re not seeing instant results, and you start to
feel depriv ed and frustrated. Your instant gratifier wants you to feel
better, so it starts whispering to you to cheat “just a little bit,” and
you fall off the wagon. In reality, most diet experts will tell you that
it’s very helpful to allow yoursel f an occasional treat on a diet, and
they recommend building that into the program. But in the twins’
black and white world, you’ve just failed. The critical voice beats you
up for being weak and having no willpower . Its belief that you’re
destined to be a failure is even stronger than before. Your instant
gratifier wants you to feel better, and you’ve already had that piece
of chocolate, so why not eat the whole bag? You go off the diet,
gain back the couple of pounds you had lost, the critical voice tells
you that you’re fat and unattractive–and the cycle starts all over
again.
Complicated Grief
When someone we love dies, a feeling of deep, painful grief is a
natural and common respon se. Actual ly, grief can be trigger ed by
the loss of anything we value, anything in which we’ve invested
time, energy, a part of oursel ves--a job, a work of art, a beloved pet.
People who are divorcing are often surprised (and appal led) by the
depth of their grief, unless they realize that what they’re mourning is
not the angry battleground that the relationship has become but the
dream they sti ll cherish of what might ha ve been.
Whatev er the cause, the feeling of grief often comes in waves.
The first flooding, crushing tidal wave usually subsides within a few
days or weeks, but even months later an unexpected, poignant
memory will bring on tears, a sudden constriction of the chest, a
lump in the throat. If the grief is relatively uncompl icated, these
peaks become  less intense and less frequent over time, and
eventual ly they f ade a way.
Howev er, various factors in ourselv es or our environments can
also make grief more comp licated – and thereby more prolonged
and difficult–by leaving behind a sense of unresolved issues or by
delaying or interfering with the process of resolution. For example, if
multiple losses  have occurred in too short a time in the past, we may
not have the inner resour ces left to cope with the present. If the
people we’re used to depending on are overwhelmed by their own
feelings, our social support network may unravel when we need it
most. Or if those around us don’t share our sense of loss, they may
be unable to r elate to what we’r e experiencing.
The critical voice often causes grief to become more
compl icated. Even before a loss occurs, we may tortur e ourselv es
with irrational beliefs and false hopes: “If I’m a good girl, Momm y
and Daddy won’t need to get a divorce.” Afterw ard, one of the most
common compl icating factors is guilt. If the relationship was strained
and ambivalent or the death was very sudden, we often feel guilty
over the things  left unsaid. Or we agoniz e in hindsight over what we
“should” have done: “If only I had made him go to the doctor
sooner .” (And yes, that is an irrational belief. The critical voice makes
us believe that we’re responsible for everything, because that’s
better than feeling powerless . But the reality is that adults have the
right to decide what to do with their own bodies, whether we like it
or not. )
In addition, grief and sadne ss are not the only emotio ns we
experience in connection with loss. Equal ly common and natural are
feelings of anger and relief. Howev er, these reactions can be quite
insidious in the damage that they do, because the critical voice
makes us ashamed and unable to acknowledge them, even to
ourselv es. It may also cause us to perceive that others disapprove of
our feelings as not “proper” or “legitimate. ” Of course, that doesn’ t
get rid of the f eelings--i t only cuts us of f from deal ing wi th them.
One of the most powerf ul critical voice messages that can keep
grief locked in place is the belief that we’re being disloyal if we heal.
The critical voice tells us that if we can let go of the pain, it must
mean that we didn’t really love the person. But pain is not proof of
love. If you look at this belief as a rational adult and not through the
eyes of your critical voice, it quickly becomes obvious how irrational
it is. Think of someone who truly loves you: would that person really
want you to go on suffering year after year, or would they want you
to have a good l ife? Would y ou want them to suf fer, if you died first?
By the way, it’s worth noting that it’s not only our own critical
voice that causes these problems. Other people may contribute to
them, too. The truth is that each person grieves in his or her own
way. Some people need to talk about their loss and to express their
feelings openly , but that doesn’t work equal ly well for everyone.
When someone else’s critical voice gives us the message that we’re
unheal thy or foolish or simply wrong because we don’t grieve the
way we’re “supposed” to, because we cry too much or don’t cry at
all, it’s unsupportiv e and unhelpf ul, and it feeds our own negativ e
messages. Telling ourselv es this message is just as destructiv e.
Whether from ourselv es or from others, it only adds to the feelings
of guilt, isolation and anger . Acknowledging and working through the
feelings is a much mor e effective way to r esolve them.
Another facet of this issue has to do with time. In our culture,
we’ve somehow become uncomf ortable with grief and mourning. A
person who wears black after the funeral–or even at the funeral
itself–is looked upon with distaste. A week of emergency leave is
seen as sufficient, if not excessiv e. In reality, even in relatively
uncompl icated cases it’s not uncommon for complete recovery to
take a year–a full cycle of the calendar –especial ly for a close family
member . Holidays, anniv ersaries and birthda ys may bring up
memories of earlier times and acute awareness of the person who’s
no longer there to take his or her accustomed role in the celebr ation.
Special occasions during the first year after the loss are likely to be
especial ly difficult, because each one is the first Thanksgiving, the
first birthda y, etc., without that person. By thinking ahead, you can
help to modify old traditions or start new customs that both honor
the past and look to the future. By the time the second year begins,
you will have been through each event once already, and the new
ways of doing things will probably start feeling more natural and
familiar.
CHAPTER 7
Learning to R ecogniz e Your Own
Critical V oice
THE FIRST STEP in taking back control from your critical voice is
learning to recogniz e it. Some people find that it’s fairly easy to see
at least some of its machinations, once they have an idea of what
they’re looking  for. For others, howev er, it’s more difficult. The
critical v oice is sneaky and can be v ery good at disguising i tself.
Try Looking Outward First
If you’re having trouble recognizing your own critical voice, it
may be easier if you look outside of yoursel f first, especial ly for the
type of person whose critical voice is out front. One fun way to
practice this skill is by looking at fictional characters. One of the
most famous characters in literature who fits this profile is Ebenez er
Scrooge from Charles Dickens’ A Christmas Carol. Scrooge (before
his transformation) is portrayed as stingy , mean-spiri ted, cynical and
pessimistic. He asks at one point if the debtors’ prisons and
workhouses are still in operation. When he’s told that some poor
people would rather die than go to such places, his infamous reply
is, “Then they had better do it, and decrease the surplus
population. ”
Another familiar character from classic literature is Eeyore, a
stuffed donkey who is Winnie-the-P ooh’s friend in the stories by A.
A. Milne. He’s consistently gloomy, pessimistic, and critical of many
of the other characters. One of his best-known expression s is, “Good
morning, P ooh B ear. If it is a good morning. Which I doubt. ”
Archie Bunker from the 1970s show “All in the Family” was quite
possibly television’ s most famous bigot. Blacks, gays, liberals, Jews,
Cathol ics and many others were all targets of his vociferously
expressed, negativ e views. He called his wife, Edith, a “dingbat, ” and
his favorite nickname for his son-in-la w was “Meathead. ” He was
actual ly not an evil character, and there were times in the series that
he was able to move beyond his narrow, ill-natur ed views, but his
suspiciousness and faultfinding were immediately appar ent to the
viewer . (Interestingly , there was one episode in which Archie
admitted that his father was physical ly and emotional ly abusiv e.
That detail of his backstory fits well with our understanding of why
the child of a bully may give power to his own critical voice and
become a bul ly himsel f.)
In more recent culture, the character of Red Foreman from
“That ’70s Show” is another  excellent example of a person whose
critical voice is very much in evidence. He was often harsh and
judgmental toward the young people in the show, especial ly his son,
Eric, appar ently in the belief that he had to toughen him up to
“make him a man.” On many occasions, he called Eric a wimp , a
“dumbass” and similar epithets. He was dispar aging, even
contemptuous, of other adults as well, including his neighbors.
Unlike Scrooge, though, Red also had a softer side; it did become
clear over time that he loved his wife and children, and the protector
quality of his cri tical v oice shone thr ough, i f rather inf requently .
With these personal ities in mind, take a little time to think
about your favorite books, movies and TV shows. See how many
other characters you can spot who are pure critical voice or who
have critical v oice char acteristics.
Now try turning your attentio n to people you know personal ly.
Start with the obvious ones, along the lines of the types described
earlier. Perhaps  you’ve had a parent, a teacher or a boss who rarely
(if ever) compl imented you but was very good at telling you what
you did wrong. With your new understanding, you can now
recogniz e this beha vior for what i t was.
Another kind of example is the person whose criticism isn’t
aimed at y ou, at least not dir ectly, but who is pr ofoundly negativ e.
Amy’s mother -in-law thought of hersel f as a kind and
gener ous perso n, and on some level she probably still was. But
she had suffered severe financial losses in later life because of
her husband’ s business decisions, and it had left her deeply
disappointed, angry and bitter. She never openly criticized her
son and daugh ter-in-law, or even her husband. But from the
moment she arrived for a visit, she complained almost nonstop
about everything else–the taxi was late, the flight was too long,
her neighbors were noisy, and on and on. As much as Amy
loved her mother -in-law, she would have to find an excuse to
leave the room every once in a while to escape the toxic
atmospher e.
Next, see if you can begin to spot more subtle
manifestations of the critical voice. Perhaps you can think of a
friend or relative who seems  on the surface to be friendl y and
supportiv e, but you’re aware that there’s something about their
support that makes you feel uncomf ortable. Your critical voice
will tell you that you’re just being ungrateful – ignore that for
the moment. Try focusing on something the person said that
left you feeling uneasy . Is there a hidden, negativ e meaning
underneath the posi tive one?
Jane’s sister always wanted the best for Jane, as she often
told her. But her frequent compliments left Jane feeling irritated
rather than pleased, and Jane couldn’ t figure out why she
wasn’t grateful for them – until she learned to look at them
from a different angle. Sister ’s comment: “Oh, what a bright,
youthful color! I’m sure I wouldn’ t have the courage to wear
that.” Translati on: “If you wear that out in public, everyone will
think that you’re trying to look like a teenager .” Sister’s
comment: “I don’t know how you do it all, working full time
with two young children.” Translation: “It’s selfish of you to
want to further your career when you should be at home with
the kids. Y ou should be pr epared to sacri fice the w ay I did. ”
Another way that people disguise criticism is with humor .
Among genuine friends, jokes and teasing are endearing, but a great
deal of what passes for humor is actual ly barbed, even downright
mean. Bullies commonly use this tactic, especial ly because they can
often make it into a double punch. They tease their victim, and then
when the victim gets upset or angry , they call him silly or
oversensi tive–two insul ts for the price of one.
Looking Inward for Your Own Critical Voice
Now that you’ve had practice identi fying the critical voice in a
variety of guises in other people, you can begin looking for your
own.
As we discussed in Chapter 4, and parallel to what you can see
in others, some of the messages from your critical voice will be
blatant and obvious. When you slap your forehead and exclaim, “Oh,
that w as so stupid, ” that ’s your critical v oice loud and clear .
A good bit of the time, though, it will be much more subtle. It
may be just a single word (“stupid”) that has come to be code for a
full sentence. Or it may be experienced as a wave of negativ e
emotion such as shame. At its most vague, it may simply be a wash
of “yuck” that y ou can’ t even put a name to .
One of the favorite tactics of the critical voice is to make you
think that something is fact when it’s not. Abigai l Van Buren (aka
Dear Abby) suggested a number of times in her advice column that
we ask ourselv es three questions before we give someone feedback:
Is it kind? Is it helpful? Is it true? We can use that same kind of
evaluation to help us to distinguish whether a comment  is coming
from our inner wisdom or our critical voice. For example, telling
yoursel f “I’m fat” is both unkind and unhelpf ul, and it’s too vague to
have any accuracy. Changing that statement to “I accept my body as
it is, and I’ll be healthier and have more energy when I lose 20
pounds” is a much mor e helpf ul statement.
You can pick up on other clues by keeping in mind the
characteristics of the critical voice that were described in Chapter 4.
You can be confident that the critical voice is involved if you hear
yoursel f makin g any of those kinds of cogni tive errors, including
absolute thinking, mindr eading, overgener alizing, second  guessing,
magical thinking, making rigid rules that have no real purpose, and
so on.
The other major set of clues to listen for is the negativ e
emotions, especially guilt, embarr assment, shame, hurt and anger .
Whenev er you experience such a feeling, stop and see if you can
identi fy what trigger ed it. This suggestion applies not only to things
you tell yoursel f but things that other people say as well. If you feel
hurt after someone says something, as soon as possible stop and
ask yourself what caused the hurt. Remember that their words can’t
actual ly hurt you –it’s your own critical voice that takes in a negativ e
message and beats you up with it (or takes in a completely
innocuous message and twists it into something hurtful). So ignoring
for the moment what the other person may have intende d, what is
your own cri tical v oice tel ling you?
Ideally, you’ll work on making a written list of as many critical
voice thoughts and feelings as you can identi fy. Seeing them on
paper will also help you recogniz e that the individual items tend to
fall into a number of broad themes. Howev er, a lot of people find
this task surprisingly difficult. For one thing, grabbing hold of these
thoughts and feelings may be like nailing jello to the wall. As soon as
you begin to pin one down, the instant gratifier will be pushing you
to “avoid, avoid, avoid,” and the thought or feeling will slide out of
your grasp and disappear . The difficulty will be compounded by the
fact that part of you won’t really want to make such a list. Your
critical voice will be making you feel as if it’s the worst thing in the
world to face up to all of your failings at once (notice the black-and-
white thinking), because nothing can ever really be healed (hope
phobia). And on top of that, writing them down is the same thing as
graving them in stone (catastr ophizing).
Contr ary to what your critical voice says, this task is truly worth
the effort. The effects of the critical voice can be helped. They can
even be healed. But that doesn’t happen by putting our hands over
our ears and hoping the bad stuff will go away. The techniques
described in the remaining  chapters will give you much more
effective methods to take your power back from your critical voice
and free yoursel f from the l ingering ef fects of ev eryday trauma.
CHAPTER 8
A Traditional Appr oach to
Treatment
AS YOU WORK at controlling the critical voice, even in small steps,
you’ll begin to feel positive changes. Gradual ly, you’ll be able to feel
more and more confident that you no longer need the critical voice
to “protect” you with its rigid rules and harsh punishment s. Like the
young queen with her regent , you’ll find that your rationa l adult self
can do a much bet ter job of rul ing the r ealm.
But in order to do that, you need new tools – new ways of
doing things. The self-help literature is replete with such tools; the
book Self-Esteem  I mentioned earlier (McKay & Fanning, 2000) is
just one example. (The same authors also put out a workbook of
self-esteem ex ercises in 2005 cal led The S elf-Esteem Companion. )
Many of the exercises suggested in books like these are
excellent and well worth trying out. Because they’ve been written
about so often, though, I’m not going to try to repeat all of them
here. Instead,  I’m going to present different kinds of approaches
and a way of putting them together that you won’t find anywher e
else. This set of tools can be used by itself or in conjunction with
techniques that y ou might ha ve learned elsewher e.
In this chapter , we’ll talk about tools that come from traditional
psychother apeutic approaches, including cogni tive behavior therapy,
guided imagery and mindf ulness. Each of these tools is helpful in
and of itself, but they’ll be even more effective when used in
combination.
The Use of Language
If you’ve begun working on hearing the critical voice and
making a list of what it communicates, you’ll probably have noticed
something significant: up till now, you haven’t been listening. Most
people don’t, and they have very little idea of what’s going on inside.
Words are not magical, but they have enormous power in shaping
our thoughts, beliefs and feelings – and, as a result, our behavior as
well. I strongly encour age my patients to listen to themse lves and to
take responsibi lity for their inner language. Because whether or not
you are paying attention on a conscious level, the fact is that the
twins ar e moni toring ev ery wor d.
One of the most important changes you can make is to excise
the word “can’t” from your vocabulary . Yes, there are some genuine
“can’ts,” mostly grounded in physical reality. I can’t jump 10 feet off
the floor. I can’t see very far without my glasses. For almost
everything else, it’s much healthier to substi tute “I haven’t been able
to do i t yet.”
The power of using language in a thoughtf ul, intentional way
can also be seen in the concept of directives. A directive is simply a
statement –an order, if you will–that you send inside to your
subconscious. The content of a directive can be almost anything,
from relatively trivial to deadly serious. For example, you might
direct your critical voice–or both of the twins – to go into “time out”
to keep them from offending other people, breaking your diet, or
drowning y ou in gui lt.
As simple as this technique sounds, it really can have a
significant impact. Remember that you own your inner world and all
of the ultimate power in it. No matter how much the critical voice
argues, i t cannot disobey a dir ect or der from your adul t core.
The biggest potential problem with directives is that the twins
will obey subconscious directives from the core just as readily as
conscious ones. In fact, subconscious commands are often given
precedence. The reason has to do with how they’re expressed. If the
conscious directive to your critical voice is “Please be quiet and sit
down”  while the subconscious directive is “COME AND SAVE ME!” it’s
understandable which one i t would r eact to first.
I’ve come to believe that some of the most powerf ul words in
the English language are “I can’t stand it!” That phrase, or any
variation of it–I can’t handle this, I can’t do it, this is too much, etc.
–is heard as a directive to “Help me! Do something! ” and it instantly
galvanizes the twins into action, with all of their old, destructiv e
ways of trying  to protect you and make things better. To replace “I
can’t stand it,” it’s much less triggering to say, “This is painful and
difficult for me. ” It’s also entir ely oka y to add, “ And I don’ t like it!”
There’s another verbalization that may also help. When you
send a directive to your critical voice, you can add the following
instruction: “You are to follow this directive regardless of what you
hear, or think you hear, me say to the contrary.” This phrasing helps
to prevent subconscious directives from overriding your conscious
intention.
There’s anothe r subtle but significant difference betwe en “I
can’t” and “I haven’t been able to do it yet” that’s worth noting. The
latter is a simple statement about a present condi tion. The former
has an element of prediction about the future–it implies “and I won’t
ever be able to.” As you’re working on paying more attention to your
inner language, it will help if you also listen for statements that
reflect this predictiv e elemen t and convert them to simple, factual
statements about the pr esent.
Notice that there’s a theme here: you have control over what
goes on inside your head. The messages from the critical voice are
beliefs, not facts. They may contain some small kernel of truth (“I
was five minut es late to a meeting this week” vs. “I’m always late”),
but for the most part they have very little grounding in present -day
reality. You can choose to dispute the distorted aspects of the
messages and r eplace them wi th a mor e accurate understanding.
Another chang e you can make in your inner dialogue is to stop
arguing with your critical voice. Have you ever tried arguing with a
4-year-old? You will never hear young children say, “Ah yes, I see
your point. You’ve convinced  me.” They keep coming up with buts
and questions, and they just don’t stop until you declar e an end (or
give in). Even worse, as soon as you allow them to suck you into an
argument, you’ve already lost ground, because you’ve tacitly
admitted that argument is acceptable. (As mentioned earlier,
authori tative parents are open to reasonable discussion but not to
having every rule contested. ) The same goes for the critical voice.
You will never win an argument with it. Whichev er side you take, it
will take the other. The healthy way out of this situation is to
remember that y ou are the adul t and r efuse to ar gue.
The Technique of Mindfulness
Mindf ulness has become quite a buzzwor d in recent years.
There are now dozens if not hundr eds of books, classes and
workshops teaching people how to use this technique. The basic
concept is actual ly quite easy to understand – although it can be
rather more difficult to implement, and most people find that it takes
practice to be able to do i t well.
As the term implies, the central component of mindf ulness is to
be mindf ul–i.e. , to pay attention. In this case, though, we’re not
talking about paying attention in class or on the road. As a
psychological technique, it has specifically to do with paying
attention to our own inner pr ocess.
As an exercise, mindf ulness is usually practiced like meditation.
You’ll want to sit comfortably  in a quiet space where you won’t be
disturbed. Put your phone on silent, or leave it in another room. You
might want to set a kitchen timer so that you don’t keep checking
your watch. Then begin to notice  what you’re experiencing in the
present moment. Whatev er thoughts, feelings, images, or physical
sensations arise, simply notice them. You might relate your
perceptions to ocean waves: just as you can’t hold a wave to you or
push it away, so you can allow what you perceive to ebb and flow
around y ou.
But that’s not quite all there is to it. In order to be an effective
tool for healing, the mindful stance is not just neutral or
uncontr olled. It has other defini te char acteristics as wel l:
It’s curious and open-minded. No part of your experience is
censor ed or denied.
It’s objectiv e. For example, instead of saying, “I’m angry” (and
being swampe d by it), you can say, “I notice that I’m
experiencing a feeling of anger ,” as if you were watching  it
calmly f rom outside.
It’s compassionate. The listening is done in a kindly way, as if
you wer e listening to y our best f riend.
Most important of all, it’s nonjudgmental. Whatev er you
experience is accepted for what it is. It’s neither right nor
wrong, good nor bad –i t simply is.
To the extent that you’re still under the sway of your critical
voice, that last sentence may be hard to take in. Your critical voice
will almost certainly tell you that some thoughts and feelings are bad
(and that you are bad for having them, of course). But remember
that the critical voice, with its magical thinking and primitive moral
reasoning, often fails to understand that there’s a huge difference
between thoug hts and feelings on the one hand and behavior on the
other. Our adult rational mind understands that all of us –good
people included – have thoughts and feelings that are less than
noble. It’s what we choose to do with those thoughts and feelings
that makes the difference. As the character of the wise Dumbledor e
remark ed to Harry Potter in The Chamber of Secrets, “It is our
choices, Harry, that show what we truly are, far more than our
abilities.”
To translate the basic concepts of mindf ulness into our terms,
being in a mindf ul state is a way of turning off the running
commentary from the critical voice. The characteristics of
mindf ulness are exactly opposi te of those of the critical voice, and
the more skillful you become at practicing this technique, the freer
you become f rom the cri tical v oice’s stranglehold.
The Concept of a Safe Place
The concept of a psychological “safe place” has been around for
a long time, and many examples can be found in the literature. One
of the most beautiful versions of this technique is the Quintessential
Safe Place, an intricate work of imagery that was design ed for the
treatment of severe trauma, particularly DID. The full-length version
of this exercise was included (by permission) in my previou s book. In
my experience , it’s more detailed than most people need for healing
everyday trauma, and the version I’m suggesting in this chapter is a
simpler one. But many people find that they enjoy the longer
version, so I’ve included the complete description of it in Appendix
A.
The “safe place” technique is often done as a guided imagery
by a therapist,  but you can certainly do it for yoursel f as well. You
may find that it works quite well just to visual ize the different
components as you read about them. Or you might choose to record
yoursel f reading the descript ion and then listen to the playback as
you visual ize. Some people also find it easier to revisit their safe
place later if they draw a sketch or diagram of it to help remind
themselv es of the detai ls.
Before you begin, there’s one note to consider about the
location of your safe place. It may be best to invent a completely
new space, rather than using a real place you’ve actual ly been to
before. The reason for this is that your safe place needs to be
completely free of negativ e associations, and it’s fairly rare that we
have such a place in real life. Even the most pleasant places in our
memories may have a few shadows in them. The following exercise
suggests one kind of new space, but you can certainly change it if
there’s another image that would sui t you bet ter.
As you’re sitting comfortably , you can allow yoursel f to
begin to relax. If you’re listening to this, you may want to put
your head back and close y our ey es – i t’s up to y ou.
Now let yoursel f begin to imagine that you’re in a cozy
cottage. It’s very sturdy and well made, so that it’s quite snug
inside, and it’s completely safe and secur e. As you look around,
you’ll notice that the cottage has everything you need to feel
peacef ul and at ease. There are comfortable chairs, perhaps
pillows on the floor, and even a cheerf ul fireplace if you like.
You can touch each object and notice that the textur es are just
right. There are big pictur e windows so that the room is filled
with light. Listen for the sounds you may hear. You can raise or
lower the volume so that each sound adds to your feeling of
peace and serenity. If there’s anything else you’d like to add to
make the space even more comfortable, you can do so
whenev er you like.
Outside, you might want to include a garden, just the right
size for you, that’s filled with fragrant flowers and butterflies.
Perhaps there’s a bench to sit on under a shady tree. The
garden is surrounded by a tall, sturdy wall, so that it’s
completely protected and safe. The sky overhead is sunny and
a beaut iful bright blue. The temperature of the air is just perfect
for your comf ort. P erhaps ther e’s a gentle br eeze as wel l.
Let yoursel f look around this space, inside and out, and
notice how beauti ful and peacef ul it is. This is your safe place.
It belongs entirely to you. And to make it even safer, I’d like to
suggest that you create a powerf ul shield of sparkl ing energy
that completely surrounds and protects the whole space. The
shield allows sunlight and fresh air and all positive energies to
flow through, but any negativ e energy bounces harmlessly off
the outside. You can pass through the shield whenev er you like,
simply by wishing it, but no one else can come in unless they
have your expl icit permission .
Most important, no one can come in unless they can
promise to do no harm of any kind – physical or emotio nal–to
you or anyone else you’ve invited in. Your critical voice can’t
make that pr omise, so i t stays outside .
Now take a good breath and, knowing that you can return
to your safe place whenev er you choose, just by thinking of it,
you can open your eyes and come gently back to the outside
world .
By the way, it sometimes happens, especial ly with a new safe
place, that we accidental ly invite the critical voice in by giving  it a
subconscious directive. If you discover that you’ve done that, don’t
panic! Simply visual ize yourself escorting it out (or give it a verbal
directive) and tell it again to stay outside the shield. It may also help
to use one or more of the processing tools described later in the
book to work on the belief that you’re not safe unless the critical
voice is wi th you at al l times.
Putting These Techniques Together
Each of the techniques described in this chapter can be very
helpful in beginning to take your power back from the critical voice.
They can be even more effective if you meld them and use them
together .
Once you’ve constructed your safe place, I recommend that you
visit it at least once a day. An ideal practice would probably be
around 15 to 30 minutes at a time, but even as few as five minutes
can be helpf ul.
In the beginning, you might spend the time just sitting quietly
in your safe place. Pictur e each detail, and allow yoursel f to renew
the feeling of peace and relaxation. It may also help to add a
breathing exercise. Virtual ly any form of controlled breathing will
work, but one simple one is the 4-3-7 technique (Eldringh off, 2014).
It’s also easy to remember , because 4 + 3 = 7. Breathe in through
your nose for a count of four, feeling your belly expand so that you
know you’re getting a good, full breath. Hold for a count of three,
then breathe out through your mouth for a count of seven. The
cadence is about one count per second. It appears that the long,
controlled exhale may be even more effective than the controlled
inhale at disengaging from the fight/fl ight stress response and
stimulating the r elaxation r esponse.
If you continue to focus on your breathing, it’s a natural step to
flow into a mindf ul stance. You’ve already been practicing noticing
the sights, sounds and textures of your safe place. Now, starting
from your focus on your breath, expand your attention to the rest of
your body. Scan yoursel f gently from head to toe and see what
you’re experiencing.
Finally, turn your attention to your thoughts and feelings.
Without trying to direct them, let them drift in and out of mind. Most
important, remember not to judge them as good or bad, right or
wrong. They simply are. If you notice a negativ e thought or feeling,
you can now recogniz e it as a message from the critical voice. But
the critical voice can’t get through your shield, so you can listen to
the message without internal izing it as Truth. In fact, the more you
practice this skill, the better you’ll get at hearing the critical voice
while still holding it at a distance. Eventual ly, you may even be able
to listen to it, not with fear and loathing, but with compassion and
even gratitude, remembering that it was created to be a protector .
No matter how wrongheaded and destructiv e it is, it always has a
positive purpose for what it does – it’s always trying to help. With
this in mind, you can ask yoursel f two questions about  what you
hear:
What is the positive purpose that the critical voice is trying to
accompl ish by sending me this thought (or feeling or memory) –
and how can I ac compl ish the same purpose in a heal thier w ay?
What can I learn from it that will benefi t me? Especial ly, what
information does this message give me about issues that still
need heal ing?
Being in your safe place and in a mindf ul stance at the same
time may make it easier for you to work on your list. Try keeping
pen and paper  next to you while you’re in your safe place. When you
notice a negativ e thought or feeling, jot it down. You don’t have to
go into detail–just enough so that you’ll be able to remember later
what i t was about.
As you become more skillful at noticing without being
overwhelmed, let your awareness begin to expand to include
memories as well as perceptions in the immediate moment. As you
experience a thought or feeling, ask yoursel f gently where it came
from, what set it off. What does it remind you of? What’s your
earliest memor y of an experience with that same feeling tone? Then
add a word or phrase describing the memory to your list and –for
the moment –let it go and go on to whatev er arises next.
Additional Details
Having gotten the basic structur e down, there are other details
you can add to your safe place to make it even more useful and
effective. I’m going to suggest two such tools: the angel box and the
healing room. The former helps with containment, and the latter is a
tool for processing tr aumatic elements.
The Angel Box
One of the essential components of trauma treatment is
containment. Among other things, containment tools help you to
work on issues  one at a time, in a controlled and thoughtf ul way,
instead of being flooded with everything at once. The Quintessential
Safe Place exercise in Appendix A has many layers of containment
built into it, and you may want to add some of those details later.
For now, though, it may be enough to have a simpler tool called the
angel bo x.
Sometimes we’re anxious or angry about something in the
present day, and there’s nothing constructiv e that can be done about
it at the mome nt, but we just can’t seem to let it go. This problem is
often a contrib uting factor in insomnia; even when we’re successful
at pushing away the anxiet y during the day, the thoughts  may come
flooding in as soon as our head hi ts the pi llow.
For the most part, it’s healthier to acknowledge our feelings and
allow ourselv es to feel them than to stuff them. Howev er, it’s not
healthy to simply sit and stew, which is what tends to happen when
there’s no positive, constru ctive action we can take to fix the
problem. F ortunately , there’s a tool that can help in this si tuation.
Imagine a beauti ful box about the size and shape of a
silverware chest. It’s called an angel box because many people
choose to visual ize it as carved all around the outside with
angels; angels are powerf ul and can hold anything. But you can
surround your box with anything you like that will make a
powerf ul container . The inside of the box is lined with the most
perfect fabric. Again, it can be anything you like – silk or cotton
or wool – in the most perfect color or pattern for you. If you
look more closely , you’ll also find that the entire lining of the
box is made up of pock ets.
When you’re feeling anxious or upset about something, and the
anxiet y isn’t serving any useful purpose–f or example, in motiv ating
you to action– you can gather  up whatev er it is, tuck it into a pocket
in the angel box, and close the lid. You can repeat this procedur e as
often as necessary to keep putting all of the thoughts away until the
time is right to do something constructiv e about the issue.
The same technique can be used for anger . By putting the
anger and all of its aspects into the box, you’ll be able to think more
clearly about possible solution s and what’s truly best for you, instead
of exploding and qui te likely making the si tuation worse.
If you have a history of everyday trauma but did not experience
the more severe forms of trauma (such as sexual abuse), the angel
box may also be quite adequate for containing thoughts, feelings
and memories from the past, as well as the critical voice beliefs and
messages that grew out of them. Howev er, if the angel box doesn’ t
feel powerf ul enough to contain some of these memories, you may
want to find a place in the garden to build the vault from the
Quintessential Safe Place. It’s helpful if you put it right beside the
next element, the heal ing room.
The Healing Room
This technique  was developed as a tool for memory processing
and was later built into the Quintessential Safe Place. It also
provides layers of containment around a traumatic memor y so that it
can be processed more safely, reducing the likelihood that the
person will become retraumatiz ed during the time that he’s dealing
with the memory . The underlying principle on which the technique
works is a f orm of systematic desensi tization.
Like the QSP itself, the technique was written as a hypnotic
exercise. I presented the original version of it at a conference of the
American Society for Clinical Hypnosis in 1999. Howev er, you and
your therapist (if you have one) can decide together whether or not
to use a formal induction while creating this visual ization, or you can
do it yoursel f in the same w ay that y ou created y our saf e place.
Here’s the description of the healing room, adapted for the
simpler f orm of saf e place:
Off to one side of the garden, I’d like to suggest that you
build another small building.  The main room of this building is
constructed very like a bank vault – it has thick, strong metal
walls and floor and roof, so that any memory you put inside will
be saf ely and completely contained .
The temperature inside the room is just right. There is soft,
pleasant lighting. And the entire space is filled with the same
sense of peace and saf ety as in the r est of y our saf e place .
In addition to the main room, the building also has a small
entrancew ay. You could think of it as a foyer, an antechamber ,
or an airlock. It’s built of the same construction as the main
room and is just as sturdy. On the outside wall of the
entrancew ay, next to the door, there’s a dial with numbers  from
0 to 10. This dial will control the intensi ty of the memor y, and
you’ll be able to set it to whatev er level you’re ready to
experience .
If you look at the side of the building, you’ll notice that
there’s a connection between the building and the angel box. It
might be a cable, or it might be a tube, like the pneumatic tube
at a bank drive-through. This connection will allow you to move
one thought or feeling or memory at a time, or even one piece
of a memory , from the angel bo x into the Heal ing Room.
In order to use this technique for processing, the first step is to
decide what to work on. When I’ve emplo yed the technique in
therapy to resolve a traumati c memory , I ask the patient to describe
the memory in as much detail as she can remember without getting
into the feelings. The object is to talk about the memory , not to re-
experience i t.
Using this tool for yoursel f, this is where your list comes in. You
can choose to f ocus on a number of di fferent kinds of tar gets:
a particular negativ e cogni tion–a thought, belief or critical voice
message (“I’m stupid, ” “I’m alw ays late”)
a negative feeling (“my emba rrassment that I forgot my friend’ s
birthda y”)
a simple memory (“the time m y sister cal led me f at”)
The more specific you are, the better. If you choose to work on a
feeling, for example, pick something related to a particular incident,
rather than a global experience such as “m y depr ession. ”
Please note: if you have more than everyday trauma in your
backgr ound, I do not recommend trying to process severe memories
on your own. In that case, it’s safer to work with an experienced
trauma ther apist.
With the target chosen, the next decision is the intensi ty level,
from 0 to 10, that you’ll be able to experience during the round of
processing. At 0, you’re essential ly in a purely mindf ul stance, aware
of the issue but not experiencing any emotions or physical
sensations; simply being a detached observ er, as if you were
watching a movie. At 10, you experience the full impact of the
original ev ent or element. Most people start the first r ound at 1 or 2.
The final step before the actual processing involves transferring
the target from the angel box into the healing room. You can simply
ask the bo x to tr ansfer the memory .
If you’re working on your own, it will be helpful to have a digital
timer handy (most cell phones have them these days). Set it to
around 12 or 15 seconds –10 seconds for the experience itself and a
few more seconds to get in and out. Have it under your fingers, so
that you can tap it to start without having to look at it. When you’re
ready to do the first round of actual processing, you can read or
listen to the f ollowing instruction:
Go into the entrancew ay of the healing room, close the
outside door, and look at the dial by the inside door. Set the
intensi ty to _____ , as you decided . When you’re ready, you can
start the timer, open the inside door and go into the healing
room. Open your awareness to the target. When you hear the
timer signal, come out of the healing room and shut the door.
Take a good breath and relax. Breathe in the peace and
serenity of the safe place and let it flow through your body,
mind and spirit. Let yoursel f be profoundly aware that you’re
safe.
Returning to a mindf ul stance, ask yoursel f what the experience
was like and how you’re feeling at that intensi ty level. The plan is to
repeat the process as many times as needed until you feel
comfortable with that level. On subsequent rounds, therefore, you
may choose to keep the intensi ty the same or to chang e it. If the
current level is reasonably comfortable, you’re probably ready to
increase i t on the next r ound.
Ideally, it should never be necessary to decrease the intensi ty.
If that happens, check to see if you’re being overconfident or–
worse–sabotaging and retraumatizing yoursel f by taking on too
much at once. If it’s the latter, then take a breath and escort your
critical v oice out of the saf e place bef ore the next r ound.
It’s my experience that people rarely need to increase the
intensi ty only one point at a time. A typical pattern would be to
master the experience at a low level (around 2), then jump up to 4
or 5, and then to around 8. And that may be enough. It was once
thought that a trauma had to be re-experienced in all of its intensi ty
in order to be healed. But clinicians have discovered over the last 30
years or so that that’s not the case. It’s often just as effective–and
less painful–to send a directive inside to the “inner wisdom” part of
your subconscious to allow you to experience the target “just
enough” to clear it. With that directive in place, a level of 7 or 8 may
be “just enough. ”
The healing room technique has several layers of containment
built into it to make the processing safer. The healing room is
located in your safe place, where you have the power to control
what happens.  There’s an anteroom or airlock between the healing
room and the rest of the safe place so that feelings and memories
can’t accidental ly leak out. The target isn’t processed in the angel
box itself, where the potential might exist for several elements to
flood in at once. Instead, the material can be processed one target
at a time. If a memory has multiple elements to it, you can isolate
them and work on each one separ ately. The dial allows you to
gradual ly increase the intensity of an emotion or even a physical
sensation to keep it at a level that you can handle. Finally, the timer
puts a time limit on the experience, so you know that the experience
has a defini te end. This feature also specifically counter acts the time
dilation effect that often occurs in sudden trauma, when it seems as
if the event is going on and on, even when it’s only a few seconds in
real time.
As you process more and more of the contents of your angel
box, your skill, confidence, and sense of mastery will all increase.
This may allow you to process larger chunks at a time. Even more
important, you’ll be taking power back from your critical voice. You’ll
probably still hear it, but it will have less control over how you think,
feel and act in the pr esent da y.
These tools can be quite helpful. That having been said,
howev er (and with apologies to Shakespear e), there’s “more in
heaven and earth, Horatio, than is dreamt of” in conventional
approaches to therapy. Through many years of experience,
increasing numbers of trauma therapists have reached the
conclusion that talk is simply not enough. In the next chapter , we’ll
explor e a whole new field called energy psychology that offers
consider able promise for treating many forms and levels of trauma
and its after effects.
CHAPTER 9
And for the Mor e Adv enturous: An
Introduction to Ener gy Psy chology
PSYCHOL OGIST ROGER CALLAHAN told a fascinating anecdote
about a patient he called Mary. Around 1980, they were working
together on her intense, life-long phobia of water. He’d been working
with her for about a year and had tried every convention al therapy
he could think of. She’d gotten a little better, but not much. One day,
as they were working in sight of a swimming pool, she complained
of nausea and upset stomach. Callahan had been studying Chinese
medicine and had learned that one of the end points of the stomach
meridian is at the bone just underneath each eye. With some
desper ation, he suggested she tap on these points to see if that
would quiet the stomach upset. After about two minutes, she
exclaimed that it was gone. It turned out that she meant not only
the stomach upset but the entire phobia as well. She was
immediately able to dabble her hands in the pool and splash water
on her face with no difficulty. Later that night, she went to the beach
and waded out waist-deep into the ocean. Even more astonishing, as
of the writing of Callahan’ s book in 2000, her phobia had never
returned.
The Field of Energy Psychology
That incident marked the beginning of the modern field of
energy psychology . Energy psychology is closely allied to the
concepts of mind-body medicine. The mind-body approach has
become increasingly popular in recent years, but for centuries before
that, traditional Western medicine preferred to act as if the mind and
the body were completely separ ate entities and could successfully be
treated without reference to each other. “Physical” ailment s were the
province of internists, surgeons, and other medical special ists, while
“mental” illnesses were treated by psychiatrists, psychologists and
psychother apists.
If you stop to think about it, though, you’ll see how absur d this
distinction is. We’re all aware of ways in which our mental and
emotional processes affect our physical being. The fact is that every
mental event (thought, feeling, perception, etc.) that you experience
is register ed in the form of physical (bioch emical and electrical)
changes in your brain. These changes in the brain in turn may
trigger a whole sequence of changes in the rest of the body. For
example, most people have at one time or another experienced the
distinctiv e feeling of an adrenaline “rush” after being suddenly
frightened. Anxiet y may bring on the sensation of “butterflies” in the
stomach. Sadness can cause tears and a lump in the throat. All of
these are simple examples of mental/emotional events having
physical consequences.
Another example of this sort of thing is biofeedback. No one
knows exactly how biofeedback works, but it’s clear that it does. An
average person with no special expertise can sit down in front of a
machine and, with the help of the feedback it provides, can learn to
use mental imagery to lower his heart rate or blood pressure–
processes that were once thought to be completely outside the
range of conscious contr ol.
The interaction between mental and physical changes happens
the other way around as well. Many women experience “the blues”
on the first day of their mens trual cycle. It’s not that there’s anything
more wrong that day than there was the day before–it’s purely the
result of the change in hormone levels. Conversely , we know that
when people take medication to increase the level of certain
neurotransmi tters in the brain, they often feel less depressed, even
before they make any changes to their behavior or their
circumstances. Many illegal drugs, and legal substances used
inappr opriately , cause euphoria. Excessiv e alcohol consumption
affects the centers in the brain that have to do with good judgment
and behavioral control, so that people do and say things  that they
otherwise wouldn’ t. These are all examples of physical factors that
create changes in people’ s mental and emotional experience.
Mind-body medicine is exploring ways in which
mental/emotional interv entions can foster physical health and vice
versa. We’re learning more and more ways in which we can
interv ene from ei ther dir ection to incr ease a person’ s overall heal th.
Energy psychology adds a third element to the mind-body
paradigm: the energy field. It’s been known for a long time by
conventional science that every living entity has a measur able
energy field around it. Furthermor e, we know from modern physics
that matter and energy are interchangeable, that they’re two
expressions of the same thing. That’s what Einstein’ s famous
equation E = mc2 means : energy is equal to mass times the speed
of light squar ed. Just as our physical being and our emotional being
are intertwined and constantly interacting with each other, energy
psychology suggests that our energy field is intertwined and
interacting with our physical/emotional self. So, just as traditional
medicine is learning that it’s possible to affect the physical level by
treating the emotional level and vice versa, energy therapies seek to
alleviate problems at the physical and emotional levels by effecting
changes in the ener gy field.
The Promise of Energy Psychology
Modern methods of energy psychology have been used by
thousands of practitioners with tens of thousands of clients and
patients over the past 35 years. There’s a massiv e amount of clinical
data at this point indicating that–in the hands of well-trained, ethical
therapists – these methods are safe and often amazingly effective.
Callahan was laughed at–and worse–f or what he called his “five
minute phobia cure,” but it really is possible in many cases to reduce
or eliminate a simple phobia in as l ittle as 20 or 30 minutes.
Cogni tive behavioral therapy, or CBT, is currently consider ed the
gold standard in psychother apy. I practiced CBT for many years, and
still do. Energy psychology doesn’ t replace traditional therapy but
adds another whole dimensio n to it. In my experience, CBT by itself
has a major fallacy: the idea that if a person learns to identi fy and
correct his “thinking errors,” his negativ e emotions will be corrected
as well. What CBT really seems to do is to teach the person how to
manage his negativ e thought s and feelings so that they don’t control
his every waking moment. That’s an improvement, but it’s not a
cure. Psy chologists ar e taught nev er to talk in terms of cur es.
Merely talking about a trauma rarely changes or heals it. When
we talk about a painful event, it’s as if we rip ourselv es open and
spread our guts out on the table. Then, if there’s no healing or
transformation that follows, we wind up stuffing it all back in. But
now, we not only still have the original trauma, we also have a
secondary layer of retraumatization. The more times we try to open
the memory , the more layers of trauma we may develop around it.
In fact, I think that much of patients’ resistance to opening up in
psychother apy often comes from just this kind of experience, and
we’ve all felt it at one time or another .
Energy psychology methods,  when added to more traditional
approaches, can be used effectively to treat both feelings and beliefs
arising from past or present events. Experiential ly, when  a painful
memory is “clear ed,” what it feels like is that the emotional charge is
completely removed. The person can still remember what happened,
but the event has no more hurt or fear or anger connected with it.
Furthermor e, as Callahan’ s example of Mary demonstr ates, our
experience over the past 35 years is that, once a memory is cleared
of its emotiona l charge using energy psychology method s, it stays
cleared.
At least some clearing can be obtained by using the traditional
method of systematic desensi tization. Howev er, processing memories
with our older, conventional tools can be a long and tedious
business. In my experience, energy methods are almost always
consider ably faster. Using desensi tization to clear even a single-
incident trauma , such as a car accident, could take as many as six to
ten sessions to thoroughly clear all of the elements of the event.
With energy methods, it may be possible to clear a single- incident
trauma in as little as one or two sessions. I’ve also found energy
methods to have a much lower chance of flooding–i.e. , triggering the
whole memor y to come flooding back all at once and at full
intensi ty–and retraumatization.
Until recently , these methods were still consider ed somewhat
experimental. Over the past 30 years, howev er, a great deal of
anecdotal and informal evidence has accumulated regarding their
effectiveness and safety. More importantly , over 100 studies have
now been published in peer-reviewed journals, 43 of which were
randomiz ed controlled trials (RCTs), the “gold standar d” of resear ch.
Ninety-eight percent of the RCTs showed significant positive results.
One energy psychology method, Thought Field Therapy, has been
recogniz ed as an evidence-based practice for trauma, and others
may follow soon. You can learn about the current resear ch on
energy psychology –and much more –by visiting the website of the
Association for Compr ehensiv e Energy Psychology (ACEP),
www.energypsy ch.org.
Types of Energy Psychology Approaches
Based on what Callahan had learned from Chinese medicine
and had obser ved from Mary, he went on to develop a method he
called Thought Field Therapy, or TFT. Since then, many other
techniques and therapies have been developed that also fall under
the heading of energy psychology . Many practitioners believe that
there are actual ly several interrelated energy systems, but the three
that are the best known and most commonly used are the
meridians, the chakr as, and the biofield.
Callahan’ s TFT is an example of a meridian-based method.
Another exam ple of this type of method is Emotional Freedom
Techniques, or EFT. It was original ly created by Gary Craig, who was
a stude nt of Callahan’ s. If you’ve heard about “tapping, ” it was very
likely that the person was referring to one or both of these  methods.
There’s also a variation on EFT called Choices, which was developed
by psychologist Patricia Carrington. What makes the Choices method
different from some of the others in this category is that it not only
seeks to clear a negativ e emotion or belief but to instill a healthy,
positive alternativ e, all within the same pr ocedur e.
One example of a biofield method is Reiki, developed by Mikao
Usui. Reiki practitioners are thought to channel healing energy to
wherever the patient needs it by putting their hands on or near the
patient ’s body. Other methods in this category include Therapeutic
Touch and Healing Touch. These two methods are most widely
known among nurses and other health professionals, especial ly in
hospital settings, where they’ve often been used to relieve pain and
anxiet y, to incr ease r elaxation, and to pr omote heal ing.
Chakr a method s tend to be less well known at present . One
example of a chakr a-based method is Advanced Integrative Therapy,
developed by psychother apist Asha Clinton. AIT isn’t simply a set of
techniques but a complete system of psychother apy that integr ates
transpersonal, body -center ed and psy chodynamic perspectiv es.
In the next two chapters, I’ll teach you how to use two different
types of energy psychology techniques that can help you release
negativ e feelings and beliefs and neutralize painful memories. One
type of technique is meridian-based “tapping. ” Under this heading,
I’ve included both a version of EFT and an algori thm, or tapping
pattern, from TFT. The other type of energy psychology technique is
a chakr a-based method cal led Breathing the Chakr as.
CHAPTER 10
Basic Acupr essure Technique
THERE ARE NOW HUNDREDS of energy psychology techniques in
the literature. By far the best known at this point is the one called
Emotional Freedom Techniqu es, or EFT. Gary Craig created the first
version of EFT, but there are now many variations on his original
approach. The version presented here is similar to the way Craig was
teaching i t in 2000, but wi th some of m y own spin as wel l.
As I mentioned earlier, EFT is a meridian therapy. This type of
technique is often called acupr essure, because it uses several of the
same points on the body that acupunctur e does, but it stimulates
those points with gentle tapping rather than with needles. There are
several hundr ed “acupoints” all over the body. The particular points
used in this technique were chosen because they’re at or near the
endpoints of the major merid ians. The basic idea is that tapping on
these points stimulates the flow of ener gy along the meridians.
The Acupressure Points Most Commonly Used
Before you can begin using a meridian technique, you need to
know where the tapping points are. The technique will work even if
you’re slightly off the point, but the more precise you are, the better.
The points are quite small–about one millimeter in diameter , the
width of a pencil point–so I recommend tapping with the first two
fingers of either hand to maximize the odds of hitting the points.
(Note that the points are symmetrical on both sides of the body. On
several of them, you can tap with both hands at the same time. On
the rest of them, you can tap first with one hand, then switch and
tap with the other. Many practitioners believe that tappin g on both
sides of the body is mor e effective than tapping only on one side. )
The locations of the points ar e as f ollows:
Eyebrow: at the beginning of the eyebrow, just off the bridge of
the nose
Side of ey e: at the corner of the ey e, on the bone
Under eye: on the top of the bone, just under the center of the
eye
Under nose: on the center just abo ve the upper l ip
Under l ip: in the hol low of the chin
Collarbone: on the undersid e of the collarbone, just off the
breastbone (the easiest way to find this point is to raise your
shoulders and feel for the hollows where the collarbone and
breastbone meet)
Under arm: on the side of the body, about eight finger widths
(around six inches) below the armpi t
Thumb: on the side of the thumb away from the fingers, even
with the base of the nai l
Index finger: on the side of the index finger away from the
other fingers, ev en wi th the base of the nai l
Middle finger: same place on the middle finger
Little finger: same place on the l ittle finger
Side of hand: on the side of the hand away from the thumb ,
even with the upper crease of the palm, just below the little
finger knuckle
Back of hand: in the hollow between the tendons of the ring
finger and l ittle finger , close to the knuckles
There’s one more set of points that will be useful to know.
These are neurolymphatic reflex, or NLR, points. Colloquial ly, they’re
known as the “sore spots” or “tender spots, ” because they’re often
tender to the touch. One way to find them is to go to the notch in
your collarbon e. Come down about three to four inches, then out
about three inches to each side. Poke around those areas until you
find a spot on each side that feels a bit tender . Note that the two
NLR points can be asymmetri cal, and they can be in slightly different
locations at different times so even if you’ve done this many times
before, you may have to hunt for them a bit. Sometimes you may
find a spot only on one side; if so, then cross over and use the
opposi te hand. (Callahan, the developer of Thought Field Therapy,
believed that the NLR on the left is more powerf ul than the one on
the right.) Also note that the NLR points are much lower on the
chest than the col larbone tapping points.
A diagram on the next page provides an illustration of all of
these points as wel l.
The Basic Technique
The full-length version of this technique has four steps, plus
preparation and finishing.
Preparation
The first thing you need to do is to decide what problem you
want to work on. If you’ve been working on your list as described in
Chapter 7, you already have any number of possible targets to
choose from, including negativ e feelings, negativ e jumps out at you
or strikes you as having more power than others. If not, then choose
whatev er you like. In fact, for the first few times you practice this
technique, it may be better to choose a target of moder ate intensi ty
rather than your deepest problem – something powerf ul enough that
you’ll feel a difference if it shifts, but not so powerf ul that it
overwhelms y ou just to think about i t.
Diagram 1: Acupr essure Tapping P oints
If you haven’t yet made a list, then use the safe place exercise.
Sit in your safe place in a mindful stance. Give it a few minutes and
see what thoughts, feelings, memories, body sensations, etc., attract
your notice. Again, see if there’s any one item that seems to come to
the forefront in the pr esent moment, and f ocus on that.
Incidental ly, this technique (and the one in the next chapter)
can also be used on physical symptoms and sensations and cravings,
as well as other kinds of issues. As you become more experienced
with this kind of work, you’ll be able to expand how you apply it. In
the beginning, though, you may find it easier if you choose either a
feeling or a belief as your tar get.
The more specific you are, the better this technique will work.
For example, if the problem is a traumatic theme or pattern (“my
mother was very critical of me”), think of one particular memory that
strongly represents that pattern. Let yoursel f get in touch with what
you felt at the time (“my embarr assment when my mothe r called me
stupid in f ront of m y friends”) and use that.
The task here is to think of a phrase or sentence that captur es
the essence of what you want to clear–e.g., “my headache, ” “my
anxiet y about giving this speech, ” “my craving for cigarettes.” If
you’re working on a memory , run it like a mini-mo vie in your mind,
and think of a short title for it. This is called the “remind er phrase.”
I’ll give you more specific tips about how best to choose and word
your phr ase in the next chapter .
Using your reminder phrase to help you, focus on the problem
as intensely as you can. On a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 is no
feeling at all and 10 is extremely intense, decide how intense the
problem is at this v ery moment.
Step 1: Setting Up for the Healing
Find the NLR points (“sore spots”) and rub them gently but
firmly whi le saying the f ollowing thr ee times wi th feeling:
Even though I ha ve [fill in wi th reminder phr ase],
I deeply and completely lo ve and ac cept m yself.
As an alternativ e, you may tap the side of hand point during the set-
up instead of rubbing the NLR points.
Step 2: The Sequence
Tap on each of the acupr essure points about 7-9 times, while
saying the reminder phrase once at each point (remember that you
can tap on the points on both sides of the body i f you like):
Beginning of the ey ebrow
Side of the ey e
Under the ey e
Under the nose
Hollow of the chin
Under the col larbone
Under the arm
Side of the thumb
Side of the index finger
Side of the middle finger
Side of the l ittle finger
Side of the hand, at the cr ease
For the eyebrow, side of eye, under eye, collarbone , and
under arm points, y ou can use both hands at the same time.
Step 3: The Nine Gamut Procedure
This is a brain-balancing exercise. The back of hand point
(between the tendons for the ring and little fingers) used to be
called the gamut point. Find this point and tap on it continuously
while doing the following nine things (hence the name of the
exercise):
1. Close y our ey es
2. Open y our ey es
3. Look har d down right (wi thout mo ving y our head)
4. Look har d down left
5. Roll your ey es in a cir cle (wi thout mo ving y our head)
6. Roll your ey es in a cir cle the other dir ection
7. Hum or sing a f ew unr elated notes
8. Count upw ard by 2s or 3s or do simple ari thmetic
9. Hum or sing a f ew unr elated notes
Step 4: Repeat the Sequence
Tap on each of the acupr essure points about 7-9 times, while
saying the r eminder phr ase once at each point:
Beginning of the ey ebrow
Side of the ey e
Under the ey e
Under the nose
Hollow of the chin
Under the col larbone
Under the arm
Side of the thumb
Side of the index finger
Side of the middle finger
Side of the l ittle finger
Side of the hand, at the cr ease
Finishing
When you get to the end of the process, take a deep breath
and exhale. Notice whethe r you’re experiencing any emotions,
memories, insights, or body sensations – if so, you may even want
to jot them down. Now put them aside and turn your attention back
to the original problem that you were working on. Focus on your
feelings as you did at the beginning and again rate the intensi ty
from 0-10.
Short Form
There’s also an abbreviated form of this technique that may
work for at least some issues. It may be worth trying first, especial ly
if you’ve just run into the restroom to deal with something going on
in the immediate moment and ha ve a very short time to get a grip .
The short form consists of doing Step 1 (the set-up) and
tapping on the first seven points of the sequence (eyebrow, side of
eye, under eye, under nose, hollow of chin, collarbone). It then goes
directly to the finishing pr ocess, lea ving of f Steps 3 and 4 .
A Special Note on Trauma
As I mentioned earlier, Roger Callahan developed the first
modern meridian technique, which he called Thought Field Therapy,
or TFT. One major difference between EFT and TFT is that EFT
practitioners typical ly use the same pattern of tapping no matter
what issue they’re working on. Callahan believed that the specific
points to be tapped on, and the sequence in which you tap on them,
should be different for different kinds of problems. He called these
various tapping patterns “algori thms. ” One particularly useful
algori thm to know is the one f or trauma.
To use this approach, you can use the tapping technique
described above, with the same preparation and finishing, but
substi tute the trauma algori thm for the EFT sequence in steps 2 and
4:
Step 1: S etting up
Step 2: T rauma algori thm:
Beginning of the ey ebrow
Under the ey e
Under the arm
Under the col larbone
Step 3: Nine gamut pr ocedur e
Step 4: R epeat the tr auma algori thm
After You Finish One Round of Tapping
After you’ve completed the four steps, the finishing phase
includes noticing what happened to the intensi ty level of the
problem. There are several possible outcomes, and what you do
next will depend on which outcome you’re experiencing. This isn’t an
exhaustiv e list, but her e are some suggestions to consider .
If the intensi ty level is down to 0 or 1, hooray! Allow yoursel f to
tune in to the sense of relief and accompl ishment of having cleared
the issue. Consider whether there’s a positive feeling or belief you’d
like to strengthen. Many energy practitioners believe that clearing an
issue down to 0 is only half the process; it’s equal ly important to
replace the negativ e with a corresponding positive feeling, belief or
skill. For example, if you were working on alleviating your anxiet y
over giving a speech, you could focus on increasing your feeling of
confidence and calmness in that situation. To adapt the tapping
technique for installing a positive, you could skip the set-up
altogether or modify the wording to something like, “As I am
strengthening my [fill in the desired state], I deeply and completely
love and accept myself.” Then go through the remaining steps just
as you did bef ore.
Once one issue is cleared, you might also want to check
whatev er feelings, memories, insights, etc., came up in the finishing
phase (if any) to see if they give you ideas about what to choose for
your next tar get.
If the number is lower but not yet 0 or 1, try repeatin g the
process. Change the phrasing in the set-up to “Even though I still
have some of my _____, ” and change the reminder phrase to “my
remaining _____.” If you used the short form and the number only
went down one or two points (or didn’t go down at all), try using the
long f orm.
If the intensi ty goes down in the first round or two but then
seems to get stuck, consider switching to the technique described in
the next chapter . Sometime s the most thorough way to clear an
issue is to use mor e than one ener gy system.
If the intensi ty doesn’ t go down, one possibi lity is to take
another look at your reminder phrase and consider whether it
captur es where the real power is. For example, let’s say you were
tapping on “my hurt when my father called me fat.” The initial
intensi ty is an 8, and it still feels like an 8 after a round of tapping.
But when you tune in more closely to your feelings, you might find
that the hurt isn’t the main issue–the power is in your anger . If
that’s the case, you can tap all day on hurt, and the rating won’t
budge because you’re aiming at the wrong target. Alternativ ely, it
may be that your hurt was the best focus original ly, but now the
target has shifted to anger . That’s why it’s important in the finishing
phase to focus in and assess the problem you were working on.
Otherwise it may feel as if you’re not getting anywher e, when
actual ly you’ve cleared one problem and have already moved on to
something else wi thout r ealizing i t.
Sometimes the intensi ty rating will increase after a round of
tapping. If this happens, it often means that you’re getting in touch
with feelings that the twins had dissociated and tried to keep buried.
As uncomfortable as it may feel in the moment, this is actual ly a
good thing in the long run. Remember that these feelings have been
there all this time and have been affecting you, even if you didn’t
know it. Having them come to the surface means that you can work
on them and possibly even resolve them once and for all. If the
intensi ty is higher but is still at a level you can tolerate, the best
thing is usually to keep working on the issue with several more
rounds of treatment. Oftentim es the intensi ty will crest like a wave
and then, l ike a w ave, begin to ebb unti l it flows a way.
Finally, if you follow these various suggestions and the intensi ty
of an issue stays high, it may be that you need more help with it
than this exercise can provide. I recommend putting the issue in
your angel box and seeking out a therapist–preferably one who
practices ener gy psy chology –to help y ou further .
CHAPTER 11
A Chakr a-Based T echnique
ACCORDING TO ANCIENT TRADITION, the chakr as are the major
energy centers  running down the midline of the body. The chakr as
are much larger than the acupoints. The word “chakr a” translates as
“wheel, ” and they’re described as spinning or swirling wheels of
energy that permeate the physical body and extend out beyond it in
both f ront and back.
There are some differences of opinion, but most traditions
describe seven major chakr as, ranging from the top of the head to
the floor of the torso . Their locations ar e as f ollows:
Seventh (cr own): at the top of the head
Sixth (br ow): at the center of the f orehead
Fifth (thr oat): at the hol low of the thr oat
Fourth (heart): at the smal l dip in the br eastbone
Third (solar plexus): o ver the solar plexus, midw ay between the
bottom of the br eastbone and the na vel
Second (sacr al): at the lower abdomen, thr ee to f our
fingerwidths below the na vel
First (r oot): in the perineal ar ea at the underside of the torso
and just o ver the bot tom edge of the torso in both f ront and
back
Breathing the Chakras
This method, designed by psychother apist Stephanie Eldringhof f
and myself, is a simple, elegant technique for clearing and balancing
the chakras. It’s easy to do and yet capable of producing a powerf ul
effect. Another advantage of this technique is that it has built into it
a process for strengthening  a positive alternativ e to the target
problem.
Before we go through the details of the technique, take a
moment to think about the seven chakr as listed above. Imagine that
you can breathe through each of them, one at a time. The breath
through the crown chakr a goes up and down. The breath through
the sixth, fifth, fourth, third, and second chakr as goes through both
the front and back of the body. The breath through the root chakr a
goes both front and back and up and down. It may help to hold in
mind the image of an accordion, with its bellows expanding and
contracting. (Some people see the bellows expanding as they
breathe in, others as they breathe out. You can choose whichev er
image works best f or you.)
This technique starts in much the same way as the tapping
technique in the previous chapter . The first thing to do is to choose
what problem to work on. Refer to your list or use the safe place
exercise, as before. Once you have a specific target in mind, the
reminder phrase takes the form of an action statement that begins
with a verb, such as “releasing my...” or “healing my....” Using your
action statement to tune into the problem as clearly and intensely as
you can, give the problem an intensi ty rating from 0-10.
Alternativ ely, you can simply notice the intensi ty of the issue in your
body sensations.
Again parallel to the tapping technique, the next step is to do
some form of setting up for the healing. There’s a longer form than
the one that was presented as part of the tapping technique, and I’ll
describe that version in the next chapter . For now, though, I suggest
you simply use the same format as before: tap the side of hand
point or rub the NLR points while repeating the following three
times:
Even though I ha ve [fill in wi th the pr oblem],
I deeply and completely lo ve and ac cept m yself.
From this point, the pr ocedur e is as f ollows:
1. Focus on your seventh chakr a and begin conscious breathing, as
if the chakr a has its own respiration. You can touch the chakr a
with one or both hands if it helps to sustain the focus. Repeat
your action statement (“releasing my...”) and take four
conscious breaths, imagining the air flowing in and out in an
up/down dir ection thr ough the cr own of y our head.
2. Turn your focus to your sixth chakr a. Touch it with one or both
hands if necessary . Repeat your action statement and take four
conscious breaths, imagining the air flowing in and out through
the front and back of y our head.
3. Repeat step 2 for the fifth, fourth, third, and second chakras,
imagining the flow of air through the front and back of your
body. At the first chakr a, imagine the air flowing both front and
back and up and down.
4. Pause and notice your feelings, thoughts and body sensations
around the issue. See if anything else has come up as well and,
if so, set it aside for the moment. Recheck the intensi ty level of
the issue y ou wer e working on.
Depending on whether the intensity level has gone down, gone
up or stayed the same, you have essential ly the same choices as you
did following one round of the tapping, such as repeating the
procedur e with the same issue or changing your focus to another
issue that has come up .
If the intensi ty level is 0-1, it may be appropriate to work on
cultivating a positive, desired state that is opposi te to the problem
state– a feeling, thought, action or physical response. Put that
desired state into a statemen t such as “I am now feeling _____” or
“I believe _____ now” or “I will now do _____. ” Then continue the
process as f ollows:
5. State your positive intention out loud. Turn your attention to
your first chakr a and take four conscious breaths, breathing
through it front and back and down to the core of the earth.
With each breath in, bring the healing state into your core, and
release whate ver remains of the problem state on the out
breath.
6. Continue the process in step 5 with the second through sixth
chakr as, breathing in and out both the front and back of the
chakr a like an accordion. At the seventh chakr a, let the breath
go in and out in an up/down direction through the crown of
your head.
7. Pause and notice your feelings, thoughts and sensations about
the target issue and your positive intention. Recheck the
intensi ty rating of the original target. Also notice the degree to
which y ou feel you’ve embodied the desir ed, posi tive state.
To finish the process, choose  a small action to take as soon as
possible to support the new state that is opposi te to the old problem
state. Be alert for interference from your critical voice that would
sabotage you by setting an impossibly high goal. The chosen action
can be as small as writing a note to put in your wallet or leaving
yoursel f a voice mail messag e to remind you of your new feelings
and insights about the issue you worked on. If you have aromatic
oils, you could put a drop on your skin and sniff it, then put another
drop on a cotton ball and put it in a baggie to carry with you. When
you sniff the scent again later, it will evoke the feeling of the healing
experience.
By the way, there’s no limit to the number of times per day that
you can use any of these techniques. One colleague mentioned to
me that she likes to do Breathing the Chakr as every morning before
she gets out of bed. She found that it helped her feel center ed and
made an ex cellent start to the da y.
CHAPTER 12
Putting These T echniques to Use:
More Bells and Whistles
THE BASIC FORM OF EFT has gener ally been reported to be
successful about 60 to 80 percent of the time. That’s actual ly quite
remarkable when you consider that one round of tapping takes only
a few minutes  to do. Howev er, there are other skills that you can
add to EFT or Breathing the Chakr as –or any other healing
technique, ev en a tr aditional one–to mak e it even mor e effective.
The Association for Compr ehensiv e Energy Psychology offers a
training and certification program in a system called compr ehensiv e
energy psychology (CEP). For the past several years I’ve been
teaching clinicians how to use this approach. (If you’re a practitioner ,
you can find out more about it on the ACEP website, www.
energypsy ch.org.) One of the things that makes this program special
is that it pays explicit attention to certain elements that most stand-
alone techniques tend to gloss over, if they include them at all. Two
of these elements are balancing the energy field and clearing
blocking beliefs out of the way. In the experience of many
practitioners, both of these elements help to maximiz e the
effectiveness of ener gy techniques. The set ting-up pr ocedur e used in
the techniques  described in the previous chapters is designed to
accompl ish both of these things, but it’s a minimal approach. There
are other details that can be added to accompl ish these purposes in
a more thorough way. Later in the chapter , we’ll also talk about tips
on constructing r eminder phr ases to cr eate the most impact.
Balancing the Energy Field: Energy Hygiene
Physician Robert Becker (1985) helped to establ ish that the
energy field of every living being has polari ty–much the same way
that a magnet has north and south poles. Under various condi tions,
the polari ty of the field can become reversed, or the field can
become nonpolariz ed or disorganized. One could easily fill another
book describing these condi tions and their consequences in detail.
Howev er, it’s sufficient for our purposes to understand that if any of
these conditions is present, the effectiveness of energy techniques is
undermined. (Indeed, I suspect that the same thing could be said of
traditional therapies as well.) It may seem that the technique isn’t
working at all, or you may see an improvement but find that it
doesn’ t last.
When I’m using the CEP protocol with patients in my office, I
actual ly test to see if any of these condi tions is present and, if so,
apply corrections that are specific to each one. But most people are
able to create a beneficial effect by doing a series of these  corrective
exercises themselv es.
At a minimum, I recomme nd doing one or more of these
exercises before you begin any energy work. They have no negativ e
side effects, so it does no harm to do them even if you don’t need
them. (Think of it as being like putting a bandaid on healthy skin.
It’s not needed, but it’s not hurting anything, either.) And like the
energy techniques, there’s no limit to how often you can do them, so
many people build them into their schedule once or twice a day as a
matter of course. When done on a routine basis, this practice is
often r eferred to as ener gy hygiene.
The following is a set of energy hygiene exercises I often
recommend to patients. You can pick and choose which ones you
like, but doing the entire set will probably take less than 10 minutes.
You can also do them in an y order.
1. Tap the side of hand point 10 to 20 times.
2. Rub the NLR points f or 10 to 15 seconds.
3. Over Ener gy Corr ection2:
a. Cross your left ankle o ver your right.
b.With your arms outstr etched in front of you, put
your hands back to back (palms f acing outw ard).
c. Cross your right wrist o ver your left.
d. Interlace y our fingers.
e. Circle your hands down and then inward, resting
your interlaced fingers on y our chest.
f.On the in-breath, place your tongue on the roof of
your mouth; on the out-breath, let your tongue fall
naturally to the floor of y our mouth.
g. Hold f or 90 seconds or longer .
4.Rub or tap the collarbone points for 20 seconds or longer
while breathing in through the nose and out through the
mouth. For even better effect, cross your hands over to the
opposi te sides of y our body .
5. Cross Cr awl:
a. While standing, lift your left knee (as if marching)
and at the same time lift your right arm and swing it
across the midline of your body. Touch your outer left
thigh wi th your right hand.
b.Return to standing posi tion.
c. Lift your right knee while lifting and swinging your
left arm across your body. Touch your outer right
thigh wi th your left hand.
d. Repeat this sequence f or 60 seconds or mor e.
e. Optional: add humming or simple math (e.g., count
upward by 3s).
f.This ex ercise can also be done si tting or lying down.
6. Basic Unswi tching Pr ocedur e:
a. Hook one middle finger into your navel and pull up
slightly. With your other hand,
1) Tap or rub both col larbone points;
2) Tap or rub the under nose and hollow of chin
points at the same time;
3) Tap or rub y our tai lbone.
b.Switch hands and r epeat.
Note that you can add 4-3-7  breathing as described in Chapter
8 (or other breathing technique) to any of these exercises. As I
mentioned earlier, controlled breathing, especial ly with a prolonged
exhale, helps to stimulate the relaxation response of the
parasympathetic nervous system and disengage the fight/fl ight
response.
If you have time to do only one of these exercises, I
recommend the Over Energy Correction. In particularly stressful
times, you might set your watch or phone to ding on the hour and
then do this exercise for one to two minutes every hour throughout
the da y.
By the way, you might notice that you do either the first or
second of these exercises during the setting-up step of both energy
techniques. And now you can see why: what the set-up actual ly
does is to combine a traditional cogni tive technique (the use of
affirmations) with a technique that rebalances the energy field
(thereby enhancing ef fectiveness).
Dealing with Blocking Beliefs
I’ve always disliked the old Nike slogan, “Just do it.” The fact is
that if we could “just do it,” we would. If you’re even moder ately
motiv ated to do something, and you’re not doing it, there has to be
a reason. Moreover, the reason you’re not doing it has to be even
stronger than y our lev el of motiv ation, so i t’s not trivial.
Along with imbalances in the energy field, the presence or
absence of blocking beliefs is a major factor that can strongly affect
how well the treatment works –or whether we allow ourselv es even
to try the treatment in the first place. These are negativ e beliefs and
expectations that get in the way of healing. We all have them, and
they can make the healing process much more difficult. These are
examples of some of the most common blocking bel iefs:
It’s impossible f or me to get completely over this pr oblem.
It’s not saf e for me to get completely o ver it.
I don’ t deserv e to be completely f ree of i t.
I won’ t know m yself if I don’ t have this pr oblem an y mor e.
I’ll feel depriv ed if I giv e up this pr oblem.
I don’ t want to giv e it up completely .
If I heal this problem, the person who hurt me will have gotten
away with what they did.
By this time, it won’t surpri se you to hear that these beliefs
come from the critical voice. The more powerf ul they are, the more
they cause us to feel discour aged and hopeless. If we can’t get past
them, we may wind up just giving up and throwing in the towel. The
good news is that we can get past them, often with fairly simple
techniques.
In the CEP protocol, we teach three strategies for clearing
blocking beliefs and getting them out of the way. In each case, the
basic approach is to name the problem that we’re working on, name
the blocking belief related to that problem, and then end with an
affirmation. I’ ll describe each of these str ategies in some detai l.
The Comprehensive Correction
This strategy is a good one to use if you don’t know whether
you have any blocking beliefs related to the particular problem
you’re focusing on. It also works well when you have a sense that
you’re holding blocking beliefs, but you don’t know what they are.
It’s a kind of shotgun approach–it addresses many of the common
beliefs and then throws in a catch- all line to cover anything else you
might ha ve overlook ed.
To use this correction metho d, rub the NLR points or tap the
side of hand point whi le saying the f ollowing, pr eferably out loud:
Even though I ha ve this [fi ll in wi th reminder phr ase],
And ev en if it’s impossible f or me to heal this completely ,
And ev en if it’s not saf e for me to get completely o ver it,
And ev en if I don’ t deserv e to feel an y better,
And ev en if I don’ t want to get completely o ver it,
And ev en if I won’ t do what I need to do to get o ver it,
And [fill in any other blocking beliefs or negativ e attitudes
you’re aware of]
And ev en if I ha ve other blocks to get ting o ver it,
I deeply and completely love and accept myself, honor and
respect m yself,
And I forgive myself for having [fill in with reminder phrase],
and for holding onto i t for so long,
And I r elease others who contributed to i t.
Some people find it difficult at first to say an affirmati on as
strong as this, especial ly out loud. But I recomme nd that you say the
entire statement as written if you possibly can. It’s a direct pushback
against the critical voice and often a powerf ul part of the healing,
even before you get to doing a round of your chosen treatment
method. Your critical voice will tell you that if you love and accept
yoursel f as you are now, you’ll become complacent and lazy and will
stop trying to improve, which will be a catastr ophe because of
course you’re so inadequate – but then again, why bother trying
because you’re just doomed to fail, right? None of this is true. The
reality is that if you work on accepting yoursel f as you are now, you
take power away from the critical voice, which actual ly makes you
stronger and more likely to be able to take further positive and
effective actions.
The Standard Correction for a Single Belief
If you have a sense that you’re holding a specific blocking  belief
in relation to a problem you’re working on, you can clear that belief
all by itself. This technique follows the same format as the setting-up
procedur e you learned earlier. While rubbing the NLR points or
tapping the side of hand point, you state the belief followed by an
affirmation, then repeat the whole statement twice more (for a total
of thr ee times). Her e are some examples:
Even though it’s not safe for me to get completely over my fear
of heights, I deeply and completely lo ve and ac cept m yself.
Even though it’s impossible for me to completely heal the hurt
from when my father called me stupid, I deeply and completely
love and ac cept m yself.
Even though I don’t deserv e to completely release my guilt
from putting my mother in a nursing home, I deeply and
completely lo ve and ac cept m yself.
As you can see, ther e’s a particular af firmation that we use
most commonly . But it is oka y to v ary the wor ding, especial ly if the
standar d formula begins to get stale. Just be sur e to listen f or
sneaky interf erence b y the cri tical v oice. If y ou change the
affirmation, the objectiv e is to mak e it stronger and f resher –don’ t
allow the cri tical v oice to undermine i t. You want it to ha ve sparkle,
zing, pizzazz; something tri te like “I am a good person” pr obably
won’t have much ef fect.
Another detai l you ma y have noticed about the wor ding is that
sometimes the phr ase sa ys “ev en though, ” and sometimes i t says
“even if.” It’s a fairly smal l point, and i t may not mak e a di fference
for you, but i t’s worth a mention. W e use “ev en though” f or times
when y ou know (or ar e fairly certain) that the statement appl ies and
“even if” when y ou don’ t know . In the compr ehensiv e corr ection, f or
example, the first l ine begins wi th “ev en though, ” because y ou know
you ha ve the pr oblem (that ’s why you’re working on i t!). The next
several lines begin wi th “ev en if,” because y ou don’ t know whether
any of those beliefs appl ies to y ou–you’re treating them just in case.
The Blocking Belief as a Target of Treatment
Sometimes a blocking belief is so powerf ul that it won’t clear
with either of the approaches described above. One reason this can
happen is that the belief isn’t specific to one problem –it’s a global,
pervasive belief about you as a person or about life in gener al.
Instead of the belief that “I don’t deserv e to be over this problem, ”
for example, you may hold the belief that “I don’t deserv e to be
happy and wel l.”
It won’t hurt to try the standar d correction on the specific
version of the belief. But if your felt sense is telling you that the
belief isn’t shifting, the best approach is to treat it as a problem in its
own right and do the full protocol of meridian tapping or chakr a
clearing with the belief as your focus. The reminder phrase for both
the setting-up procedur e and the treatment technique would be
something like “my deep belief that I don’t deserv e to be healed” or
“my profound bel ief that i t’s impossible f or me to be wel l.”
Another possibi lity to consider when a blocking belief is this
pervasive and powerf ul is that there’s a history of trauma behind it.
As with all critical voice beliefs, blocking beliefs may contain some
kernel of truth from past experience. Perhaps you failed a test in
grade school, and your father yelled at you that “you’ll never amount
to anything! ” The event (you failed a test) was real. The belief (“I
can never be successful at anything”) is irrational. If the event was
an everyday trauma that was relatively limited in scope, you may be
able to treat it yoursel f using one of the treatment methods you
learned in the earlier chapters. Once the trauma is clear and the
emotional charge is down to 0 or 1, check the belief again  to see if it
still needs clearing. If so, you may have taken enough of the steam
out of it that it will now respond to the standar d correction. Or if it
still feels powerf ul, you still have the option of treating it as a
problem in i ts own right.
On the other hand, if you discover that the underlying trauma
or traumatic pattern is more than you can comfortably deal with by
yoursel f, or if the belief isn’t shifting and you don’t know why, this
may be another of those times when you need additional help. A
mental health professional – preferably one who practices energy
psychology –may be able to provide the resour ces to help you get
past the block.
The Wording of Reminder Phrases
The words that we use for reminder phrases aren’t magical.
They simply help to direct the healing to the correct target. Howev er,
words can be quite powerf ul, and there is something of an art to
choosing the right word or phrase. Here are some basic principles
you ma y find usef ul.
The one major DON’T is: don’t start the reminder phrase with “I
am.... ” Under some circumstances, the hypnotic effect of repeating
“I am afraid to fly” over and over may outweigh the effects of the
treatment and incr ease the pr oblem instead of decr easing i t.
It is okay to start the phrase with “I was” or “I felt” or any
other past-tense verb. For example, you might say “I felt so
ashamed when Dad called me fat.” As you’re clearing the feeling
with the treatment, the use of the past tense is also reinforcing the
fact that the ev ent is o ver.
While you’re still in the phase of learning to use these
techniques, the simplest rule of thumb is to focus the phrase on the
belief or the f eeling wor d that y ou want to tar get–for example:
my shame when Dad cal led me f at
my fear of flying
my anger at myself for making the wrong choice when I bought
this house
my belief that I’ ll never be good enough at this job
my belief that I need m y mother ’s appr oval to be happ y
The more specific the remind er phrase is, the more noticeable
the treatment effect will be. This is the way I often explain it: A big,
gener al problem (such as “my depression”) is like a bathtub full of
water. Doing one round of treatment, especial ly with tapping, may
be like scoopin g a cupful of water out of the bathtub . There really is
less water in the tub, but the difference won’t be perceptible. It
would take many, many cupfuls of water–man y rounds of treatment –
for you to be able to notice any difference. A lot of people  would just
give up becaus e it would seem as if it wasn’t working. A very specific
problem, on the other hand, is like a drinking glass. If you have a
drinking glass,  and you take a cupful of water out of it, the water
level will go down consider ably. The glass may even be emptied in
one try .
It may also be helpful to remember that there’s a difference
between cogni tion (thoughts or beliefs) and affect (feelings).
Although we often use the words “I think” and “I feel”
interchangeably , they don’t actual ly mean the same thing. Howev er,
a particular issue may contain both aspects at the same time: “I feel
like a failure” and “I believe I am a failure.” Try saying both
statements aloud (“I feel...” and “I believe...”) in relation to your
particular issue, see which one you sense as more powerful, and
treat that one first. You may find that treating the more powerf ul
one takes care of the other statement as well. If not, then treat the
other statement as an aspect in i ts own right.
As you gain some practice in using this technique, you may
want to move beyond focusing only on a feeling or a belief. Trauma
is also held in the body. As neuroscientist Candace Pert famously
said, “Your body is your subconscious mind. ” If you’re working on a
particular trauma, tune in to your body and check out what you’re
feeling on a somatic level. For example, are you feeling pain or
pressure anywher e? Dizziness? A heavy heart? Butterflies in your
stomach? A feeling of being choked up or frozen? Anything else? If
so, notice which sensation seems to have the most power or
prominence and start there. Find words to describe the sensation as
precisely you can. The setting-up phrase then becomes something
like, “Even though I have this sharp , stabbing pain at the base of my
neck... ” or “Even though I have this queasy , unset tling, fluttery
feeling in m y stomach.... ”
The Question of Permanence
As a final note, I’d like to say something about the question of
permanence. It’s a question that many people–cl ients and clinicians
alike–ask as they ’re starting out on this new r oad.
As you remem ber, many people date the beginning of modern
energy psychology to Callahan’s work with “Mary” and her extreme
phobia of water. Callahan reported that he check ed back with her
periodical ly for 30 years after that event, and during that time the
phobia had nev er returned.
No one can promise you that a problem will never come  back.
We wouldn’t be able to say that for certain about Mary, for example,
unless we followed her until the day she died. But the experience of
many practitioners is that when we treat an event from the past–
something that’s over and done with–and we get the emotional
charge down to z ero, it doesn’ t come back.
Having said that, it does sometimes happen that you treat a
trauma down to zero, and you think it’s completely finished, and
then you find that another aspect  of it comes to the surface. If this
happens, the first thing to remember is that it does not mean that
you failed or did anything wrong. Quite the contrary–it may well be
that the reason you can now see the new aspect is that you were
successful in moving the other aspects of the trauma out of the way.
For example, consider the case of a woman who had an abusiv e
father and a gentle, caring mother. After clearing the hurt and anger
connected with her father, she may find that she’s now aware of
deep anger toward her mother that she never even knew she had –
anger f or not pr otecting her .
The second thing to rememb er here is that you don’t need to
be afraid of a trauma coming back. It’s not exactly fun, but it doesn’ t
have to be scary. If something else does arise, you now have tools
to deal with it. The new aspect simply becomes the target for further
treatment. Moreover, contrary to what the critical voice will try to tell
you, there will be an end to it at some point, and in the meantime
you’ll be get ting bet ter and str onger wi th each aspect y ou treat.
While we’re on the topic of permanence, another thought I
want to share with you is that sometimes permanence isn’t the goal,
at least in the short term. Energy psychology techniques are often so
effective at getting to the origins of problems that we sometimes
forget we don’t always have to go there. These technique s can also
be used to treat and manage symptoms, and that’s a perfectly valid
choice– as long you’re aware that the symptoms probably won’t (yet)
be completely el iminated this w ay.
If I have a problem with procrastinating on paperwork, for
example, I may be able to do something as quick as a 10-minute
energy treatment in the morning to help me get my tasks done on
time for that day. (I find Pat Carrington’ s Choices method particularly
useful for this kind of goal.) I know I’ll probably need to keep
repeating the treatment every day–on a tough day I might even
have to refresh it again in the afternoon. Ultimately , I might well
want to make the effort to find and treat the origins of the
procrastination, so that it no longer bothers me at all. But in the
meantime, by doing the daily treatment I’m getting a good return on
a smal l investment of time.
My favorite approach to explaining this point is my dandelion
analogy . Let’s say that your yard is covered in dandel ions, and you
don’t like them. There are two ways you can go about fixing the
problem. One way is simply to mow the lawn. It’s a fast solution,
and the dandel ions will be gone–but they will also come back in
short order, so you’ll have to mow again in a few days. The other
way is to dig each weed up by the roots. It will take longer to do it
that way, but each weed will be permanently gone. (Until new seeds
blow over from your neighbor ’s yard but, as Scheher azade said,
that’s another story f or another da y.)
2 The exact origins of the Over Energy Correction, the Cross Crawl and the
Basic Unswitching Procedure seem to have been lost in the mists of time. In the
interests of giving credit where it’s due, however, I’d particularly like to
acknowledge the contributions of Roger Callahan, Wayne Cook, Paul and Gail
Dennison, Fred Gallo, George Goodheart, Steven Rochlitz, and John Thie.
References
American Psy chiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disor ders (DSM-5)  (5th ed.). Washington,
D.C.: American Psy chiatric Association Pr ess.
Barber, B. K. (1996). P arental psy chological contr ol: Revisiting a
neglected construct. Child Dev elopment, 67 , 3296-3319.
Baumrind, D . (1967). Chi ld car e practices anteceding thr ee pat terns
of preschool beha vior. Genetic Psy chology Monogr aphs, 75(1) ,
43-88.
Becker, R. O . (1985). The body electric . New Y ork: Wi lliam Morr ow &
Co.
Braun, B . G. (1988). The BA SK model of dissociation: P art I.
Dissociation, 1 , 4-23.
Brough, K. (1995). P ersonal communication.
Brown, D ., Scheflin, A. W ., & Hammond, C. D . (1998). Memory ,
trauma tr eatment and the la w. New Y ork: W . W. Norton &
Compan y.
Ecker, B. (2011, January 13). R econsol idation: A univ ersal,
integr ative framework f or highly ef fective psychother apy [Web
log post]. R etriev ed July 3, 2016, f rom ht tp://bi t.1y/1zjKtMr .
Eldringhof f, S. (2014). P ersonal communication.
Herman, J . L. (1992). Trauma and r ecovery. New Y ork: B asic.
Janof f-Bulman, R. (1992), Shattered assumptions . New Y ork: Fr ee
Press.
Karjala, L. M. (2007) Understanding tr auma and dissociation: A
guide f or ther apists, patients, and lo ved ones . Atlanta:
ThomasMax.
Larsen J . T., Hemeno ver, S. H., Norris, C. J ., & Cacioppo , J. T.
(2003). T urning adv ersity to adv antage: On the virtues of the
coactiv ation of posi tive and negativ e emotions. I n Aspin wall, L.
G., & Staudinger , U. M. (eds. ), A psy chology of human
strengths: P erspectiv es on an emer ging field . Washington, D .C.:
American Psy chological Association. pp . 211–225.
McCarth y, J. (1995). Adv anced workshop on M-E abuse. W orkshop
presented in A tlanta, GA.
McKay, M., & Fanning, P . (2000). Self-esteem (3rd Ed.). Oakland, CA:
New Harbinger Publ ications.
McKay, M., & Fanning, P . (2005). The sel f-esteem companion .
Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publ ications.
Van der K olk, B . A., McFarlane, A. C. , & W eisaeth, L. (Eds. ) (2006).
Traumatic str ess: The ef fects of o verwhelming experience on
mind, body , and societ y. New Y ork: The Gui ldford Press.
Walker-Andrews, A. (1997). I nfants’ per ception of expr essive
behaviors: Di fferentiation of mul timodal inf ormation.
Psychological B ulletin, 121 , 437-456.
Appendix A:
The Quintessential Saf e Place
ONE OF MY FAVORITE TOOLS for containment is a beauti ful guided
imagery exercise called the Safe Place, which was developed by
sociologist Jim McCarth y (1995). McCarth y has interv iewed and
consul ted with dozens of therapists and hundr eds of clients across
the country , and many of them also contributed to the Safe Place
design.
The concept of a “safe place” isn’t new. Many patients invent
one spontaneously , and a number of psychologists have suggested
variations on the basic theme. I used to simply encour age patients
to develop whatev er form of safe place they liked. Howev er, this
particular model has several unique features, and each part of it is
designed to give the Safe Place very special therapeutic benefi ts. For
that reason, I’ve renamed this imagery the Quintessential Safe Place
to distinguish it from generic safe places. I ask the patient ’s
permission– and I recommend to you–to install the Quintessential
Safe Place exactly as described, at least initially. I also let people
know that the core has the power to reject the visualization and tear
down the Quintessential Safe Place if she decides after the
installation that she doesn’ t like it. But very few people do .
It’s very important to have the Quintessential Safe Place
installed by your rational, adult core. The Safe Place belongs to you,
the core, and like everything  else in your inner world, it exists to
serve your needs. The crucial factor is that you ratify the
construction of the Safe Place–put your stamp of approval on it, so
to speak. Remember that the critical voice cannot disobey your
direct order. By the same token, it cannot trash the Safe Place if you
have ordered that i t stand.
The Safe Place, and the tools that go with it, were originally
designed for patients with DID. The central theme of this book,
howev er, is that we’ve all been traumatiz ed in one way or another .
As a result, we all have parts and aspects, even if they’re not as
clearly defined as in a DID system. This technique works just as well
for those of us who don’ t have DID .
The Quintessential Safe Place visual ization described below is
written in the language of a hypnotic exercise, and a therapist
suitably trained in hypnosis may prefer that approach. But it isn’t
really necessary to do a formal hypnotic induction–most people with
any kind of dissociativ e talent  slip in and out of trance quite naturally
anyway in the course of daily life. You can simply allow yoursel f to
sit back and relax, with closed eyes if that’s comfortable, as the
visual ization is presented. Because of the level of detail, you may
wish to install only one or two components of the Quintessential
Safe Place at a time, pausing in between to allow time to assimi late
the image f ully.
Imagine that you are in a mountain meadow , a beauti ful
meadow filled with grass and wildflowers and butterflies. It’s a
sunny day, and the sky is a perfect shade of blue, with fleecy
white clouds. It’s a large meadow , about 300 to 500 acres,
completely surrounded by tall peaks, so that it’s completely
enclosed and safe. One very important aspect of this very
special place is that it’s always the present day here, never the
past, so when ever you go into the Safe Place, you are in the
present, not in a moment in the past .
Over the entire Safe Place, I’d like to suggest that you put
a dome of golden light. If you like, you can think of this as
divine light. You can also extend the dome underneath the
ground, so that it makes a complete spher e of protection . The
dome of light acts as a shield over and around the Safe Place,
so that no one can enter i t without y our permission .
[Check to make sure that the meadow and the dome are in
place bef ore proceeding. ]
More or less in the middle  of the meadow , I’d like to
suggest that you build a house so that you, and anyone else
you invite in, have a comfortable place to stay in when they’re
in the Safe Place. It’s a one-story house, with no attic or
basement. It’s built on a foundation of granite or bedrock at
least 10 or 12 feet thick. There is no back door, and the
windows cannot be opened from the outside. When you’re in
your house in the Safe Place, you are completely safe, and no
one and nothing can come at y ou unexpectedly .
[Pause to check pr ogress.]
Inside, there are as many rooms as you need – living room,
bedrooms, bathrooms, a dining room that always had fresh,
healthy food, and so on. We can come back and fill in the
details later, but for now, just know that the house has
everything that y ou could w ant or need .
[Pause to check pr ogress.]
A short distance from the house, perhaps 20 or 30 yards
away, if you look around you might find that there’s a rocky
outcropping with a little waterfall flowing down it into a
beauti ful little pool. If you look closely , you’ll find that the water
has sparkles in it of the same golden light that makes up the
dome. This is your healing pool. You can come to the pool,
bathe in the water, drink the fresh water from the waterfall, and
be healed inside and out .
[Pause to check pr ogress.]
About the same distance from the house, but in a different
direction, you might want to put in a bank vault. You’ve
probably seen a bank vault in the movies or on TV or even in
real life. It has very thick, strong walls and floor and ceiling, all
made of metal. If you open the door and walk inside, what
you’ll find is that it has whatev er kind of storage system is
perfect for you. It may have shelves or drawers or bins or
lockbo xes, whatever kind of storage works best for you. The
vault will hold as much as you need it to hold – it never gets
full. What you can do is to take painful thoughts and feelings
and memories that you’re not quite ready to work on yet and
store them in the vault. This will keep these thoughts and
feelings and memories safely contained, because the vault will
hold anything that you need it to hold. By using the vault, you’ll
also know exactly where these thoughts and feelings and
memories are stored when it becomes time to work on them.
And what do we often do with our most precious object s? We
put them in safety deposi t boxes in bank vaults. Even these
painful memories are very precious, and they’re stored in a safe
place unti l we’r e ready to deal wi th them .
For the moment, though, I’d like you to come back out of
the vault and turn the big handle that’s sort of like the steering
wheel on a car, and on one side of the vault I’d like to suggest
that you put in a slot like the night deposi t at a bank. A night
deposi t has baffles inside so that things can be put in, but they
can’t get back out. This way, if other thoughts or feelings or
memories come up at a later time, you can simply slip them in
through the slot, and you don’t even have to open the door of
the vault. Things will go directly into storage until you’re ready
to tak e them out .
[Pause to check pr ogress.]
Another feature I’d like to suggest for your Safe Place is a
small cottage. This can serve as your Time Out Cottage. Your
critical voice is not allowed in the Safe Place. One very
important rule of the Safe Place is that no one is allowed to hurt
anyone else. In order to be invited in, someone must be able to
promise that they won’t hurt anyone else, physical ly or
emotional ly, and as long as your critical voice is still actively
trying to be a protector , it can’t do that. It’s excluded from the
Safe Place and can’t get through the dome of light. So you
might want to put a bubble of golden light on the outside of the
dome with a cottage inside it. It’s a very pretty cottage with
many of the same features as the main house– very comfortable
furniture and pillows and so on. It has big pictur e windows, so
that it’s always bright and cheerful inside and filled with healing
energy. That’s a place where you can have the critical voice go
so that it’s not in the main Safe Place but is in a protected Time
Out.
Notice that the particular design of this Safe Place provides
layers of containment. Your core has a special, private study inside
the house, inside the Safe Place. Trauma memories are kept in
storage containers inside the vault, inside the Safe Place. When your
critical voice acts out, it can be kept inside its own Time Out
Cottage, inside a bubble of golden light–but outside of the Safe
Place, so that i t can’ t accidental ly escape ther e and cause ha voc.
Virtual ly all patients –and even some therapists – seriously
under estimate the importance of adequate, effective containment.
One therapist called to consul t with me because her patient was
strongly resisting bringing up an area of traumatic memory . As we
talked, it became clear that the only containment the two of them
had worked out for this memory was a box with a ribbon around it
tied in a bow. I pointed out that boxes leak, cardboar d disintegr ates,
bows become untied. A better approach is to think of traumatic
material as equiv alent to radioactiv e waste and needing the same
level of safety precautions. When the therapist had the patient install
the Quintessential Safe Place and put the memories in the vault, the
processing w as able to pr oceed much mor e smoothly .
Once the central aspects of the Safe Place have been installed,
there are many other details that can be added. The following are
some example s of elabor ations to the main house and the Time Out
Cottage:
a living room, with comfortable couches and chairs and pillows,
where you and your parts and aspects can come to meet and
talk.
a dining room, with a table that always has delicious and
healthy things to eat and drink, so that no one in the Safe Place
ever goes hungry or thirst y.
enough bedrooms and bathrooms for all of your parts and
aspects. Some of the bedrooms will be for just one part, others
may be dormi tory style, and some may be nurseries for the
littlest ones.
a playroom or recreation room in the house, and you can have
in this room all of the kinds of toys and games and activities
that you or any of your parts would like to have, all of them
safe.
a private study that’s just for you. This is a place where you can
go to rest or think or write, and no other part of the system is
allowed to enter unless you invite them. So even within the Safe
Place, within the house, you have a special place to go that no
one else can go in wi thout y our permission.
outside the house, right next to it, a playground, with slides and
swings and perhaps a tree fort–anything that you and your
parts might enjo y.
in the Time Out Cottage, a special kind of guard or shield that
comes down over the doorknob and prevents it from being
opened from the inside. The shield is designed to detect the
level of emotional intensi ty in the cottage. When your critical
voice in time out has calmed down and is no longer out of
control, the shield retracts, and the critical voice is able to open
the door and come out of the cot tage.
Individuals may also find that they want to make modifications
to the Quintess ential Safe Place to suit their own particular needs. In
some cases, for example, the core has a whole separ ate house of
her own, not just a study in the main house. If a patient already has
a safe place, I often suggest that she lift it into the new Safe Place.
One patient created a whole amusement park in the back of her
Safe Place. Some of my patients have healing pools that are deep
enough to swim in, but others may want one only a few inches
deep. One patient with a fear of drowning doesn’ t have water in her
pool at all; instead, it has many-color ed swirls of sparkl ing energy.
Another patient has parts who are trigger ed by drinking water. They
drink magic sparkl ing cider instead.
On rare occasions, a patient may find the image of a mountain
meadow unacceptable as a safe place. In such a case, it’s
permissible to find another , more suitable image. Two that have
worked in the past are an island far out in the ocean and a
Southwestern mesa with very tall, steep sides. Even when the
setting is changed, howev er, all of the other elements and the basic
rules of the Saf e Place should r emain the same.
The main thing to listen for when any change is proposed is
that the change is being made in a positive, healthy direction–i t is
not being made by the critical voice to sabotage the Safe Place by
incorpor ating trauma triggers. If the core hasn’t ratified the
construction of the Safe Place, or if she subconsciously allows it, the
critical voice can sneak in. It’s important, therefore, to talk about the
reasons for wanting the change. For example, the reason that the
house has no attic or basement, or even a second floor, is that those
areas are often associated with abuse. Even color may be highly
significant. One patient remember ed being abused in a room with
green walls, so there’s no green anywher e in the house in her Safe
Place.
With the main elements installed, you may want to draw or
diagram your Safe Place. You may also want to give a copy of the
drawing to your therapist, if you have one. This will help the
therapist visual ize it as you see it and help both of you keep track of
any changes that ar e made o ver time.
With the Safe Place in place, you can begin to invite parts to
come in. As a singleton–i.e. , someone who doesn’ t have DID–you
might simply visual ize yoursel f as you were at different ages,
perhaps with the help of photogr aphs, and invite those younger
“selves” into the Safe Place.  A part who has been invited into the
Safe Place can leave and re-enter at will. On the other hand,
remember that you critical voice isn’t allowed into the Safe Place at
all unless it promises not to hurt you or any other part. In other
words, it can continue to help protect you, but in order to do that
from inside the Safe Place, it must significantly change how it goes
about its work. It’s important that you send a directive inside stating
this rule.
The parts of you that hold trauma memories need more than a
simple invitation to enter the Safe Place. It’s tremendously important
to begin  getting them into the Safe Place as soon as possible, but it
has to be done in such a way that their traumas are contained. It
would undermine the central purpose to have these parts running
around loose, even in the Safe Place, with all of their memories and
feelings still susceptible to being trigger ed at any moment. There are
additional tools that will help you get these parts safely into the Safe
Place, contain their traumas,  and more. Two such tools,  the angel
box and the healing room, were described in Chapter 8, and several
more are presented below . Once you have the central elements of
the Safe Place installed, the possible elabor ations are limited only by
your imagination and that of y our ther apist.
The Globe of Light
Perhaps the most importan t of these tools is the globe of
golden light. When a flashback comes up, you can surround the
whole trauma scene with a globe made of the same golden light as
the dome. You then lift the globe up and into the Safe Place. If you
go near the trauma scene yoursel f, you may be sucked into it, so
you’ll need a designated helper for the next step. The helper reaches
into the globe of light and gently guides any and all parts out of the
globe– and therefore out of the trauma scene–into the Safe Place.
Remember that the Safe Place is always the present day, so as the
parts step out of the globe,  they’re automatical ly brought into the
present. When  all of the parts are out of the memory , you visual ize
squashing the globe of light down to softbal l size. The reason for
this is to make sure that all parts are out of the globe. No parts are
ever put into the vault–only the globe containing the memory. If it
won’t squash down, there’s still at least one part inside. If you can
get it down to softbal l size, it’s too small for anyone to be left inside.
Then the globe is put thr ough the slot on the side of the v ault.
Once the memory is put away, the helper takes the now-
liberated parts to the healing pool, where they bathe in the healing
water. They also drink fresh water from the waterfall, so that any
residual hurts are healed inside and out. The helper makes sure they
have fresh, new clothes. Afterw ards, the parts can run and play, or
go into the house to eat or rest–whatev er they would most like to
do.
This technique is the central application of the Safe Place. The
more memory parts you put in the Safe Place and the more trauma
memories you contain in the vault, the fewer flashbacks you’ll have.
Even before you come anywher e close to processing the memories,
this one change can provide significant stabilization in your inner and
outer life. In addition, finding that you can control your inner life,
that you no longer have to be at the mercy of unpredictable
emotional storms, can be a pr ofoundly heal ing experience.
A critical aspect of this technique is the identi ty of the helper . It
cannot be the core or any part who has anything to do with the
particular memory , because if they reach into the memory , they’ll get
sucked right into the flashb ack. I’ve found the concept of angels
very useful, and whether they’re viewed as literal or metaphorical
makes no difference. A few of my patients have told me that they’re
uncomf ortable with angels, and we’ve come up with a workable
substi tute–one decided to use “grandmother spirits,” for example–
but most people seem to like having angels in the Safe Place. And
they make wonderf ul helpers. They’re completely immune to
flashbacks, because they weren’t affected by any of the trauma
memories. They’re infinitely kind and patient and will rock and sing
to child parts for as long as needed, even days at a time. They don’t
even need sleep .
Curiously , several of my patients, completely independently of
each other, noted an interesting observ ation about their angel
helpers. What they found was that angels will do any positive thing
the core asks them to do, but they won’t take initiative. The steps
don’t have to be spelled out every time; you can simply say, “Please
take care of the parts in this memory ,” and the angels will follow
through with the whole procedur e. But you have to ask. One aspect
of empowerment is taking personal responsibi lity for one’s own
work, and this observ ation seems to be an elegant reflect ion of that
principle.
The Light Net
The same golden light that’s used for the dome and the globe
can also be formed into a light net. If a flashback has come up, you
may want to use the net to make sure that all of the parts involved
in the memory are taken into the Safe Place at the same time. Or
even while not in flashback, you may become aware of a painful
memory that you want to put into the vault. You sweep the light net
through the entire inside to find and pick up the desired parts with
their memories . The net will pass through any other parts or objects.
Once all of the parts have been gently picked up by the net, the net
becomes a globe of light, and you can follow the procedur e
described abo ve to get the parts into the Saf e Place.
The Silver Screen
Another useful tool is the silver screen, designed by
psychother apist Karishma Brough (1995). It’s about the size and
shape of a regular screen door, but where the mesh would be are
very fine l ines of si lver, and ev erywher e the l ines cr oss, they sparkle.
The main purpose of the silver screen is to screen out “psychic
crud,” particula rly the crud that we’re carrying for other people. You
visual ize yoursel f holding the screen in front of you, and you step
forward into the screen while pulling it through you at the same
time. As Brough taught it, you also keep in mind the person whose
crud you’re carrying and, as you step through the screen, you say, “I
keep what is mine for my life’s work, and I lovingly send back to you
what is yours for your life’s work. ” Notice that the statement is made
without anger or resentment. The underlying concept is that each of
us has to do our own life’s work. No one else can do our work for us,
and we can’t do anyone else’s, even if we were willing. An even
more thorough cleaning is accompl ished by pulling the screen front
to back, from side to side, and from above the head to below the
feet.
Golden Rain
The critical voice is not allowed in the Safe Place, for obvious
reasons. The Safe Place would not be safe for anyone else if it could
enter freely. An easy way to set this up is to make a rule that no one
is allowed to enter the Safe Place unless they promise, with
complete truth, never to hurt another part, physical ly or emotional ly.
The critical voice can’t make that promise. But every once in a while,
for a variety of reasons, the core may subconsciously allow it to
sneak in. When this happens , it may do quite a lot of damage to the
Safe Place.
At its essence, what makes the Safe Place safe is not that it can
never be harmed. What makes it safe is that you have total power
over what happens there–which means that any damage can be
easily fixed. If your critical voice sneaks in and trashes it, or if
anything else goes wrong, you can take the golden healing water
and make it rain everywher e in the Safe Place, even inside the
house. That will restore everything to its proper condi tion. The
golden rain evaporates as soon as it’s done its job, so there’s no
worry about soggy sof a cushions.
Sometimes your critical voice can fool you into thinking that the
Safe Place has been trashed even when it hasn’t been able to get
inside. Remember that your critical voice believes that these new
fangled tools won’t work and will therefore only cause pain and
disappointment, so it will often do anything it can think of to stop
you from using them. It creates this false image by putting an
overlay, like a plastic film, over the outside of the golden dome. The
effect is like looking into a house through a very dirty window –
everything inside looks dirty and dingy. The answer , of course, is to
use the golden  rain on the outside surface of the dome to wash off
the overlay. You’ll then be able to see that everything in the Safe
Place is just as i t should be.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Dr. Lynn Mary Karjala is a licensed psychologist in private practice in
Roswel l, Georgia. In addition to her gener al practice, she has
special ized training and extensiv e clinical experience in the treatment
of trauma in all its forms. She also trains other clinicians in the use
of both conventional and innovative approaches to therapy and has
given many presentations on these topics in the U.S., the U.K., and
Canada. Before going into clinical practice, she was a university
professor, teaching graduate and under graduate courses  on child,
adolescent, and life-span development and the psychology of death
and dying. She lives in Roswel l with her husband of 32 years and
assorted dogs and cats.
Liked the B ook?
Thanks so much for reading HEALING
EVERYDAY TRAUMAS!
One of the most rewarding things about writing is building a
relationship with my readers. Your opinion and feedback matter to
me, so feel free to reach out and send me an email at
Lynn@heal ingev erydaytraumas.com . I’d love to know what you
think!
Visit the website, healingeverydaytraumas.com , to
Order addi tional copies of this book.
Join the “Insiders List,” where you’ll receive a free additional
energy hygiene  technique, plus exclusiv e content, discoun ts and
announcements of upcoming events via email. (Note: To access
bonus content, opt -in is r equired.)
Coming soon– a webinar series!
If you’ve enjoyed this book ...
To help others discover HEALING EVERYDAY TRAUMAS, please
consider spreading the word by leaving your honest review on
Amaz on or Goodr eads. The best support an author can ask for is
enthusiastic, word-of-mouth recommendations from satisfied
readers.
