 Introduction t o IFS - PDF 2  
 Introduction to 
 The Steps of the IFS-A pproach  
 Companion to the 
 “Introduction to IFS Therapy” 
 video series 
 (grey videos) 
 by Lucas Forstmeyer 

 Sign up to the Newsletter 
 and receive videos covering 
 Advanced Parts Work Concepts 
 -  Inner Critic 
 -  Polarization 
 -  Interpersonal Dynamics 
 -  Self-Like Parts 
 HERE  
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 2 

 Table of Content  
 What is IFS and what are these steps?  3 
 The Goals of IFS-Therapy  4 
 The Principles underlying IFS-Therapy  5 
 Introducing the Steps of the IFS-Approach  6 
 The 6 F’s in more detail  7 
 The Unburdening-Process in more detail:  9 
 Questions for each Step of the  11 
 Internal Family Systems Approach  11 
 _____________ 
 This PDF covers the steps of the IFS-Approach (Internal Family Systems) to 
 therapy. It is a companion to the 
 “  Introduction to Internal Family System Therapy” 
 video series (grey videos) 
 You can ﬁnd all the videos here: 
 https://lucasforstmeyer.com/free-ifs-video-course-therapy-techniques/ 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 3 

 What is IFS and what are these steps? 
 IFS or Internal Family Systems is both a model of our mind and psyche and 
 an approach to therapy and coaching. 
 Both the model and approach work with the assumption that each person has 
 many Parts (subpersonalities) and that these parts strongly inﬂuence 
 (sometimes even determine) how one feels and acts in the world. In addition, 
 IFS asserts that each person has a Self (an essential/spiritual core) that is not a 
 Part and that is inherently compassionate, calm and open. 
 Learn more about the theory and model of the IFS approach  HERE  . 
 The IFS-Model gives a map for different parts, relationships between parts and 
 interactions with the Self. The IFS approach gives practical tools on how to 
 work with Parts and support the Self to be more present. 
 The ‘Steps of the IFS approach’  are the steps of the therapeutic (and coaching) 
 process IFS uses to work with parts that are creating problems in a person’s 
 life. In essence, these steps are about helping the Self and these parts to 
 re-connect and empower the person’s Self to help his or her own Parts. 
 These steps are used by therapists to support their clients as well as people 
 working with themselves to develop more compassion and empowerment to 
 support themselves and their own Parts. 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 4 

 The Goals of IFS Therapy 
 (Video 1) 
 As an approach, IFS has certain goals that form an orientation for how most 
 sessions could ﬂow. 
 This way they can help us as an orientation to see what a good next step would 
 be in a session and the overall process of working with Parts. 
 The Goals of the IFS approach are: 
 1.  Building trust between Self & Protectors 
 2.  Finding & connecting with Exiles 
 3.  Unburdening  Exiles 
 4.  Helping Protectors release their Roles 
 5.  Strengthen Self-Leadership 
 To learn more about these, please watch the video. 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 5 

 The principles underlying IFS Therapy 
 (Video 2) 
 IFS-Therapy (or IFS-Coaching or working with one's own parts) is based on 
 certain principles. 
 As principles they inform the way we think about and react to challenges and 
 parts showing up. 
 The Principles underlying IFS Therapy are: 
 1.  Lead Sessions from Self 
 2.  All Parts are welcome 
 3.  Parts are intelligent & you can interact with them 
 4.  All Parts have positive Intent 
 5.  Parts are not the burdens they are carrying 
 6.  To change the system, we need more Self and less vulnerability (aka. 
 Child parts running  things) 
 7.  Self is the Agent of Healing 
 8.  Self is equipped to lead the System 
 (They are explained in depth in the video linked above.) 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 6 

 Introducing the Steps  
 of the IFS A pproach  
 The rest of this PDF is an overview of these Steps. For this I ﬁrst want to 
 introduce a visual I developed (open for constructive feedback): 
 A few general points on these steps and this diagram: 
 1.  IFS distinguishes between the work with Pprotective Parts (Protectors) 
 and vulne rable (child) Parts that are carrying pain from the past (Exiles). 
 There are different steps for both. 
 2.  The whole process revolves around the connection between parts (both 
 Protectors and Exiles) with Self - this is represented by the yellow 
 watercolor. 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 7 

 The 6 F’s in more detail 
 (Video 3) 
 The 6 F’s are the IFS-Steps for working with Protectors (Parts that actively do - 
 sometimes very distorted - things to try and protect a person from harm and 
 keep them functioning  in life). 
 The basic goals of the 6 F’s are 
 -  to connect with a person’s Protectors as Parts (as in, these are activated 
 subpersonalities and not Self), 
 -  understand why they are acting a certain way 
 -  enable a connection between the Protector and the Self (where the Part 
 is separated from the Self.) 
 For this IFS has developed 6 steps: 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 8 

 FIND:  Finding out with which topic and Parts we work AND then localizing the 
 part in or around the body. 
 ↓ 
 FOCUS:  Focusing the attention inwards on the Part.  Learning a bit about it and 
 its qualities. 
 ↓ 
 FLESH OUT:  Learning more about the Part in a way that  supports the 
 separation between Part and Self. 
 ↓ 
 FEEL TOWARDS:  Testing the Presence of Self, unblending  from the Part if 
 necessary to establish a strong connection between Self and Parts. 
 ↓ 
 BEFRIEND:  Learning more about the Part and establishing  a good relationship 
 between Self and Part. 
 ↓ 
 FEARS:  Asking about the deepest fears of the part  that inﬂuence it to act the 
 way it does. Usually, this points towards Exiles and polarized Parts. 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 9 

 The Unburdening-Process in more detail: 
 (Video 4) 
 The Unburdening -Process covers the steps that have emerged within IFS to 
 help Exiles to let go of a Burden (old pain and unprocessed emotions) they are 
 carrying - and often have carried for years or decades. 
 This process includes the Self being present with and holding the Exile in their 
 pain, helping them have a new experience and supporting them in letting go of 
 the old pain they have been carrying. 
 PLEASE BE AWARE:  Being with Exiles is delicate work. 
 Exiles are simultaneously fragile and holding very intense emotions and 
 experiences. So trying to “just unburden” an exile is both dangerous and 
 ungracious. Going to these old places without appropriate skills or support by a 
 person who can hold you and the Exile can lead to the system becoming more 
 charged and activated. 
 So if an Exile keeps coming up in you: please get the help that is appropriate. 
 I still want to cover the Steps of the Unburdening-Process, so you can get a 
 clear picture of the whole IFS-Process: 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 10 

 ACCESSING EXILE:  Establishing a connection between  the Self and Exile in 
 which the Self can be present with the experience of the exile. 
 ↓ 
 WITNESSING EXILE:  Inviting the Exile to show anything  it wants to show so 
 it can be seen, felt and understood - in what happened and how that made it 
 feel. 
 Additionally:  Supporting the Exile in understanding  that this happened in the 
 past. 
 ↓ 
 REPARENTING EXILE:  Allowing the Exile to have a new  experience. Either in 
 the memory of the past OR in the present. 
 ↓ 
 RETRIEVING EXILE:  Freeing the Exile from the situation  of the past and 
 bringing it into a better situation in imagination or the present. 
 ↓ 
 UNBURDENING EXILE:  Holding a ritual in which the Exile  can let go of the 
 Burdens it has been holding. 
 ↓ 
 INTEGRATING EXILE AND PROTECTOR:  Finding a good place  for both Exile 
 and protector in the system and life. 
 Also:  Integrating the qualities of Being that are  arising in you. 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 11 

 Questions for each Step of the 
 Internal Family Systems Approach 
 Above I’ve covered the basic steps and understanding of the IFSApproach. 
 This can be considered the blueprint of how IFS views the therapeutic process, 
 all the way from getting to know a protector via unburdening an exile to 
 integrating both into a healthier system. 
 In the following pages I will present to you the most important and powerful 
 questions and tools that have emerged to facilitate this process. These 
 questions and expressions have emerged through decades of practice. 
 This list alone will not allow you to fully grasp the depth and intent of each tool 
 or question - that is not what this list is meant to do. 
 ●  If you are studying IFS right now, I hope this list will be a resource to 
 understand how to support the ﬂow of a session. 
 ●  If you are just getting to know IFS, I hope this list can give you a feel for 
 the perspectives and mindset used in IFS. 
 ●  If you are using IFS for your personal work, I hope these questions can 
 help you to be with yourself in new ways. 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 12 

 1. FIND 
 ●  Who needs your attention today? 
 ●  What do you want to explore today? 
 ●  Which part do you want to explore today? 
 ●  Where do you notice it? 
 ●  Where do you feel it in or around your body? 
 2. FOCUS 
 ●  Can you stay with this Part? 
 ●  Can you turn your awareness towards it? 
 ●  What is that Part like? 
 3. FLESH OUT 
 ●  What is that Part like? 
 ●  Are you aware of it in other ways? 
 ●  How close are you to it? 
 ●  Can you ask it to give you some space? 
 ●  Does it want to show you anything? 
 4. FEEL TOWARDS 
 ●  What do you feel towards this part? 
 ●  What is it like for you to be with the Part? 
 ●  Can you ask it to give you some more space? 
 ●  Can you ask other parts to step aside? 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 13 

 5. BeFRIEND 
 ●  What is the part’s role? 
 ●  What is its intent for you? 
 ●  Is it aware of you as Self? 
 ○  How old does it think you are? 
 ●  How old is this part? 
 ●  What is this part’s history? 
 ●  Is there anything else it wants you to know? 
 ●  I get that. 
 ●  I appreciate you / what you did for me. 
 6. FEARS 
 ●  What are you trying to do for me? 
 ●  What are you afraid would happen if you did not do your job? 
 ○  And what is bad about that? 
 ○  What would happen then? 
 ○  What would that mean for you? 
 ●  Checking in with Self: Do you believe this right now? 
 ○  Do you experience it like this right now? 
 ○  How is that for you? 
 ●  Are you willing to let me meet the other parts and maybe help them? 
 ●  Let’s assume we can do that… would it let us connect with the parts? 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 14 

 7. UNBURDENING-PROCESS 
 •  Contact 
 ⁃  What does the Exile feel? 
 ⁃  What do you feel towards the Exile? 
 •  Witness 
 ⁃  What do you want to show me? 
 ⁃  What do you want me to know? 
 ⁃  What do I need to know to understand how this was for you? 
 •  Reparent (Do-Over) 
 ⁃  Is there anything the part needs from you to change this situation? 
 ⁃  Does this part need something in the situation? 
 •  Retrieval 
 ⁃  Do you want to leave this place? 
 ⁃  Does this part want to be in a different place? 
 •  Unburden 
 ⁃  Ask the Part where it is carrying that pain. 
 ⁃  Ask the Part if it is ready to let go of that pain. 
 •  Integration 
 ⁃  What does it want to do now? 
 ⁃  Does it still need anything from you? 
 8. ENDING SESSION 
 •  Does any Part still need something? 
 •  Is there a good way to end this session? 
 •  Can you thank the parts that showed up? 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 15 

 I hope this PDF is helpful to you. 
 If you have any questions or remarks, please feel free to get in touch. 
 Love, 
 Lucas 
 https://lucasforstmeyer.com 
 ©  lucasforstmeyer.com 
 16 

