
Cambridge Guide to
Mentalization-Based
Treatment (MBT)
A complete and practical guide that offers a concise overview of
mentalization-based treatment (MBT) and its application in different
situations and with different groups of patients to help improve the
treatment of mental health disorders. Featuring an introduction to
mentalizing and the evidence base to support it, followed by an explanation
of the principles of MBT and the basic clinical model in individual and
group psychotherapy. Individual chapters offer extensive clinical
illustrations of the treatment of patients with depression, psychosis, trauma,
eating disorders, and borderline, antisocial, narcissistic, and avoidant
personality disorders. The final section of the book outlines the application
of mentalizing and MBT in different populations (children, adolescents,
families, and couples) and in different settings (the professional community,
schools, parental and foster care, and emergency care settings).
Part of the Cambridge Guides to the Psychological Therapies series,
offering all the latest scientifically rigorous and practical information on the
full range of key, evidence-based psychological interventions for clinicians.
Anthony Bateman is Consultant to the Anna Freud Centre, London, Visiting
Professor at University College London, and Honorary Professor in Psychotherapy at
the University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
Peter Fonagy is Director of the Division of Psychology and Language Sciences at
University College London, Chief Executive of the Anna Freud Centre, London, and
National Clinical Advisor on Children and Young People ’s Mental Health for
NHS England.
Chloe Campbell is Deputy Director of the Psychoanalysis Unit at University College
London. She is series co-editor of the Anna Freud Centre/Routledge Best
Practice Series.
Patrick Luyten is Professor of Clinical Psychology at the Faculty of Psychology and
Educational Sciences, University of Leuven, Belgium, and Professor of
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Psychodynamic Psychology at the Research Department of Clinical, Educational, and
Health Psychology, University College London.
Martin Debbané is Professor of Clinical Psychology at the Faculty of Psychology and
Educational Sciences at the University of Geneva, Switzerland, and Professor of
Psychopathology at the Research Department of Clinical, Educational, and Health
Psychology, University College London.
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Cambridge Guides to the Psychological
Therapies
Series Editor
Patricia Graham
Consultant Clinical Psychologist, NHS Lanarkshire, UK
The go-to resource for up-to-date, scientifically rigorous, and practical information on
key, evidence-based psychological interventions.
This series of clinical handbooks provides clear and concise guides to understanding
and delivering therapy, and offers clinicians a handy reference for matching a specific
therapy to a particular patient. Each book follows a consistent style, with chapters on
theory, technique, indications, and efficacy, so that healthcare professionals can move
seamlessly between different volumes to learn about various therapies in a consistent,
familiar, and trusted format. The books also provide guidance on relevant adaptations
for each therapy, such as for children, adolescents, and older people, as well as different
methods of delivery, such as group interventions and digital therapy.
Books available in the series
Cambridge Guide to Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT)
Jessica Davies, Kenneth Laidlaw and Paul Salkovskis
Cambridge Guide to Cognitive Behavioral Analysis System of Psychotherapy (CBASP)
Massimo Tarsia, Todd Favorite and James McCullough Jr.
Cambridge Guide to Dialectical Behaviour Therapy (DBT)
Jim Lyng, Christine Dunkley, Janet Feigenbaum, Amy Gaglia and Michaela Swales
Cambridge Guide to Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT)
Laura Dietz, Fiona Duffy and Patricia Graham
Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
Anthony Bateman, Peter Fonagy, Chloe Campbell, Patrick Luyten and Martin Debbané
Cambridge Guide to Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Adam Polnay, Rhiannon Pugh, Victoria Barker, David Bell, Allan Beveridge, Adam
Burley, Allyson Lumsden, C. Susan Mizen and Lauren Wilson
Cambridge Guide to Schema Therapy
Robert N. Brockman, Susan Simpson, Christopher Hayes, Remco van der Wijngaart
and Matthew Smout
blihd li b C bid  i i 
“This book brilliantly brings together, in accessible language, the research and clinical
wisdom that have accumulated over the past 20 years in mentalization-based theory
and practice. It definitively establishes mentalization-based treatment as the
transdiagnostic treatment it is. Requiring no prior exposure to mentalization-based
therapy, this must-read guide provides clinicians with essential tools that can be
immediately implemented. Read it! It will be worth it! ”
Carla Sharp, John and Rebecca Moores Professor, Associate Dean for Faculty and
Research, CLASS Department of Psychology, University of Houston
“Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT) is destined to become a
seminal guide. The authors have invested decades in examining how mental
processing influences our well-being and share their brilliant clarity of thought
regarding mentalizing theory and relevant research. They further provide rich,
detailed, and practical accounts of the guiding principles of MBT and describe potent
interventions that can harness mentalizing capacities and improve treatment across a
range of clinical problems. This book illustrates important ideas that will be relevant
to psychotherapists at all levels who are working to improve their clinical practice. ”
Shelley McMain, Senior Scientist, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health
(CAMH) Director, Psychotherapy Division, Department of Psychiatry,
University of Toronto
“Must-read book for anyone practicing MBT. The guide is a mind meld of brilliant
clinical, scientific, and conceptual brains, clearly showing that MBT is not a “guru
therapy ”but democratic, full of life and kicking! Having collected the experiences of
30 years of training MBT, this guide is highly didactic with numerous detailed
individual and group case descriptions giving insights into the magic potion of how
to strengthen mentalizing in very diverse mental problems and clinical settings.
MBT follows recommendations of modern psychotherapy research by including all
common factors and still provides a convincing narrative for the clinician in terms of
disorder conceptualization, goals, tasks, and change theory. With this guide MBT
proves that it has become a stand-alone transdiagnostic treatment, with a strong
theoretical and empirical underpinnings and —most important for clinicians —very
clear and concrete directions for users. ”
Svenja Taubner, Professor for Psychosocial Prevention, Medical Faculty Director,
Institute for Psychosocial Prevention, University of Heidelberg
“The charm of MBT is the balance between clear hypotheses and one ’s own critical
ability to constantly question them. Thus, MBT is a psychotherapy factory in the best
sense: creative, inspiring, and interface-compatible; for clinical practitioners oriented
toward scientific evidence and for researchers oriented toward clinical
implementation. This book is a catalyst that will greatly advance both the practice and
theory of psychotherapy. ”
Martin Bohus, Prof. em. Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Heidelberg
University; Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim, Germany
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Cambridge Guide to
Mentalization-Based
Treatment (MBT)
Anthony Bateman
University College London and Anna Freud Centre, London
Peter Fonagy
University College London and Anna Freud Centre, London
Chloe Campbell
University College London and Anna Freud Centre, London
Patrick Luyten
University of Leuven and University College London
Martin Debbané
University of Geneva and University College London
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,
New Delhi –110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05 –06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore
238467
Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press &
Assessment, a department of the University of Cambridge.We share the University ’s mission to contribute to society through
the pursuit of education, learning and research at the highest
international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108816274
DOI: 10.1017/9781108896054
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and
to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, no
reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.First published 2023
Printed in the United Kingdom by TJ Books Limited, Padstow
Cornwall
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data.
A Cataloging-in-Publication data record for this book is available
from the Library of Congress
ISBN 978-1-108-81627-4 Paperback
Cambridge University Press & Assessment has no responsibility for
the persistence or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party
internet websites referred to in this publication and does not guar-
antee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate
or appropriate.
[Medical disclaimer:]Every effort has been made in preparing this book to provide
accurate and up-to-date information that is in accord with accepted
standards and practice at the time of publication. Although case
histories are drawn from actual cases, every effort has been made to
disguise the identities of the individuals involved. Nevertheless, the
authors, editors, and publishers can make no warranties that the
information contained herein is totally free from error, not least
because clinical standards are constantly changing through research
and regulation. The authors, editors, and publishers therefore dis-
claim all liability for direct or consequential damages resulting from
the use of material contained in this book. Readers are strongly
advised to pay careful attention to information provided by the
manufacturer of any drugs or equipment that they plan to use.
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Contents
Preface ix
A Note from the Series Editor xiii
Acknowledgments xiv
Part I Overview of the Model
1A History of Mentalizing and
Mentalization-Based Treatment 1
2The Supporting Theory of
Mentalization-Based Treatment 4
Part II The Mentalization-Based
Treatment Model in Practice
3What Is Mentalization-Based
Treatment? 43
4The Clinical Process of
Mentalization-Based Treatment:
A Step-by-Step Guide 52
5MBT Group (MBT-G) 136
Part III Application and
Adaptations for Mental
Health Presentations
6Narcissistic
Personality Disorder 155
7Antisocial Personality Disorder 174
8Avoidant Personality Disorder 2039Depression 230
10Psychosis 253
11Trauma 277
12Eating Disorders 298
Part IV Application of
Mentalization-Based
Treatment in Different
Populations and in
Different Settings
13Working with Children 319
14Working with Adolescents 328
15Working with Families 340
16Working with Couples 347
17Mentalizing in Other
Settings 353
18Mentalizing and
Emergency Care 364
Index 388
vii
blihd li b C bid  i i 
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Preface
Justifying another clinical guide to the practice of mentalization-based treatment (MBT)
caused considerable discussion and reflection between us: “Surely this has all been
covered well enough over the past two decades? ”;“Is there anything new to say? ”;“Are
there enough theoretical, research, and clinical changes to warrant a new book? .”
Manifestly, our decision to write this book testifies to our conclusion that enough has
changed over the past few years both in the theoretical framework underpinning MBT
and in its delivery in clinical practice to justify another book. This is a multi-author book
rather than a collection of independent chapters by experts. Our aim has been to write a
coherent manuscript from beginning to end that summarizes all the varied strands and
applications of mentalizing theory without becoming repetitive. In summarizing the new
material, we attempt to describe the theory of mentalizing and the clinical interventions
applied in a range of mental health problems and contexts in a way that is accessible to
the interested reader who has little prior knowledge of the theory and its practical
applications. Clinicians need a framework that they can carry with them to inform their
interventions along with clinical examples of how to transform that framework into
effective clinical practice. This is the aim of this book —to be an MBT starter pack!
Recognition of the importance of effective mentalizing as a higher-order mental
processing system that underpins social processes and individual resilience has stimu-
lated ever more research about its developmental origins and its centrality —or otherwise
—in mental health problems. This in turn has led MBT, a general model of intervention
organized to enhance an individual ’s mentalizing, to become more refined in terms of
how to help people rebuild their ability to mentalize in challenging interpersonal and
social environments. We never considered our initial iterations of the clinical model to
be the final say on how to facilitate robust mentalizing, and we continue to develop our
transdiagnostic approach to helping individuals to build resilience in their relationships
and social interactions. Indeed, outcome research suggests that although MBT is effective
across a range of symptomatic domains, many patients continue to show problems with
social adaptation and personal life satisfaction. Too many of them fail to reach their full
potential in satisfying relationships and life achievements, both at the end of treatment
and in the long term. We feel that we have made progress in broadening the ambitions of
our treatment approach, but clearly there is much further to go in developing the
effectiveness of MBT. To some extent this book summarizes where we have got to.
We have attempted to make the focus of the book the clinician struggling with a
patient of greater acuity and complexity than they might have encountered before. The
mentalizing model of mental disorder conceptualizes mental health problems as devel-
opmental, certainly emerging from different routes (genetic, individual historical, cul-
tural, societal, environmental, both internal and external, and so on), but ultimately
narrowing through a single funnel of the uniquely human capacity to think socially —
that is, to mentalize. Problems of mentalizing can occur for different reasons, and the
manifestation of these problems will obviously reflect individual attributes and histories,
as well as the social context within which the individual lives. There is great clinical merit
to the developmental psychopathology concept of equifinality.
ix
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The causes may be complex and multifarious, yet the intervention that addresses an
important common mediator creates a pragmatic therapeutic opportunity. We are not, in
this book or elsewhere, attempting to reduce the multiple forms of mental disorder to a
single cause. Yet the high rate of so-called comorbidity of mental disorders calls for us to
try to identify common factors that may be involved in many disorders, which can offer a
transdiagnostic approach to remediation. This book views mentalizing as one such
common factor. Mentalizing allows the clinician to create a therapeutic framework that
supports them, when confronted with a confusing range of presentations in a single
patient, to offer both generic and problem-specific interventions. We are not sure whether
in MBT we have got the balance right between generic and specific —both are needed for
sure. Our overarching conceptualization that enduring mental health problems reflect a
lack of capacity to adapt to the social world and the unproductive resistance to change
despite the information available to the individual rests on the concept of epistemic trust —
that is, the ability of the human mind to be open or closed to social influence. Epistemic
vigilance may be a natural state, but hypervigilance points to a state of “hearing but not
listening, ”and therefore failing to internalize social knowledge offered by others.
Mentalizing may be a key to generating epistemic trust and dissolving the epistemic
dysfunction that characterizes the persistence of mental disorder. If this is so, it might
explain why enhancing mentalizing helps in such a transdiagnostic way and has been
studied as an intervention for a wide range of mental health problems. Improved social
understanding not only corrects unforced errors of social cognition in relation to self and
others, but it also opens the person to new understandings, garnered from the therapy
room in the first instance, but then, beyond that, from the attachment partnerships —
family relationships, work, and community relations —to which all of us are exposed.
These constantly and consistently influence our understanding of ourselves and others,
keeping us on the interpersonal straight and narrow. This understanding is relatively new,
but it has increased our confidence in advocating a generalist approach to psychological
therapy that is relatively easy to adopt and enhances —or rather draws on —many existing
models of psychological intervention. We are fond of saying that there is little that is new
in MBT, and that it draws on psychological principles that are simply part of our
evolutionary heritage. Yet it is the fundamental truth of this statement that has encouraged
us to produce yet another book representing a further attempt to find the correct balance
between the general and the specific for clinicians and for those who benefit from this most
remarkable of mechanisms of human processes of interpersonal healing —psychotherapy.
InPart I of this book ( Chapters 1 and2) we cover the history of mentalizing and MBT,
outline some of the basic developmental processes that contribute to robust mentalizing,
summarize the outcome research, and consider what makes things go wrong during
childhood and adolescence. In Part II (Chapters 3 –5) the key clinical principles that are
followed in MBT are set out. We hope that throughout this book we have used enough
everyday language to cut through the jargon for clinicians coming fresh to the mentalizing
world to lay the foundations of clinical practice. We chart the progress of Sarah, who has
borderline personality disorder (BPD) —the mental health problem on which our thera-
peutic approach initially focused —by describing the implementation of MBT for BPD in a
stepwise fashion. The principles underpinning MBT ( Chapter 3 ) and all the different stages
of the core model are illustrated as they are used in clinical practice in her individual
(Chapter 4 ) and group ( Chapter 5 ) sessions. Sarah is a “prototype ”—that is, she is a
fictionalized composite of someone with a diagnosis of BPD, rather than a real patient.x Preface
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Although we use the categories of borderline, antisocial, narcissistic, and avoidant person-
ality disorder, and so on, in this book to delineate different mental health presentations,
this is done primarily to link with earlier literature. Throughout, we emphasize that the
mentalizing approach follows a dimensional system and transcends the issue of categoriza-
tion. MBT requires a clinician to assess an individual ’s personality in terms of the
dimensional domains of mentalizing, rather than to establish the presence or absence of
specific descriptive characteristics that make up a “category ”of diagnosis. The details of the
(im)balance of dimensional mentalizing components that may be creating disruption to
the patient ’s social experience are at the center of a personalized evaluation; the patient ’s
formulation avoids categories and is organized around process and function. We hope that
this personalized approach is clear throughout the chapters. Sarah has a range of experi-
ences and behaviors that create problems for her and others, and yet —like so many of our
patients —she is trying hard to manage her emotions and reactivity to others and is
motivated to change. Targeting mentalizing requires the clinician to see things from
Sarah ’s perspective and to respond to them compassionately so that she experiences the
clinician as seeing her as she sees herself. This generates epistemic trust (trust in the
knowledge that the therapist conveys) within the patient –therapist relationship, which we
see as a requirement if the change we observe is to become enduring and Sarah is to take
advantage of the opportunities in her life. Sarah is depicted as a typical MBT patient —she
is moderately responsive to treatment.
Groups are an essential part of MBT. The aim of the group is to support learning
about oneself with and through others, and some specific interventions that differentiate
MBT groups from other group treatments are outlined in Chapter 5 . Sarah starts in the
group and gradually begins to participate and learn about herself through others —a
process that gradually leads to increasingly robust and effective mentalizing. Learning
about oneself through others in a group is the main format used in MBT for antisocial
personality disorder (MBT-ASPD) (described in Chapter 7 ), which, along with other
adaptations of MBT, is covered in Part III (Chapters 6 –12). In these chapters, the way in
which treatments diverge from the original model for BPD are discussed as they apply to
other personality difficulties. In adapting the model for different disorders, clinicians
follow the principles at the heart of MBT, define and formulate the mentalizing problems
of the person in front of them rather than define their “disorder, ”and tailor their
interventions accordingly. Again, although we use the categories of personality disorder,
this is only to link the reader to the area of discussion. The MBT clinician is rarely
concerned with “disorders ”and “diagnosis, ”but instead tries to ensure that the person
behind the “personality function ”is assessed in terms of the dimensional domains of
mentalizing. Through the lens of interpersonal understanding that the mentalizing
perspective offers, we see people thinking, feeling, wishing, and desiring, rather than
simply as mental disorders or personality disorders. The observation and gentle enhance-
ment of mentalizing is at the center of everything that the MBT clinician does. To some
extent, the labels of the different types of disorders are translated into different com-
monly observed patterns in the way that we as individuals think and feel about ourselves
and other people, which to a greater or lesser extent characterizes all of our patients (and,
dare we say, all of us). So, the clinician implementing MBT for narcissistic aspects of
personality functioning (MBT-NPD) ( Chapter 6 ), for antisocial aspects (MBT-ASPD)
(Chapter 7 ), or for avoidant, anxiety-dominated features of social function (MBT-AvPD)
(Chapter 8 ) follows the same core principles ( Chapter 3 ) and the pattern of interventionsPreface xi
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
outlined in MBT-BPD ( Chapter 4 ), but tweaks the MBT format and process of interven-
tion according to the mentalizing formulation of the individual. We see no binary
distinction between the more stable and slower-changing aspects of functioning usually
encapsulated by the description “personality disorder ”and the more specifically
described and arguably episodic mental disorders. Both involve characteristic failures
of mentalizing, offering therapeutic opportunities for MBT, which are discussed in the
chapters that come next. The approach to the treatment of mental-state disorders such as
depression ( Chapter 9 ) and psychosis ( Chapter 10 ) further confirms our transdiagnostic
approach. Each chapter outlines a mentalizing framework and formulation of the
problem areas, and then describes the interventions that naturally arise from these
constructions of the patient ’s mental function.
InChapter 11 , MBT for individuals who have experienced trauma is discussed, and an
MBT-trauma focused (MBT-TF) intervention approach is described. In its original iter-
ation for BPD, MBT took into account the fact that most patients had a considerable
history of attachment trauma. Working on the sequelae of these experiences was incorpor-
ated into the model. Data suggest that to some extent this generic clinical approach to the
effects of trauma on the patient worked —those who had experienced identifiable trauma
had treatment outcomes that were no worse than those who did not report a history of
trauma. Nevertheless, it is apparent that some symptoms of complex trauma may need
special attention. Again, the first step requires reframing trauma from a mentalizing
perspective. Understanding the relationship between mentalizing and trauma is detailed
in the first part of Chapter 11 . Based on the four mentalizing themes of trauma —being
alone, mental isolation and avoidance, shame, and epistemic vigilance —the MBT thera-
peutic approach (MBT-TF) is then discussed. Unusually for an approach to complex
trauma, MBT-TF is delivered in a group format on the basis that the patients may be able
to share with and learn more from others whom they see as having had the same experi-
ences as them. Individual sessions may be added to support the patients in the group.
Chapter 12 , the final chapter of Part III , covers eating disorders, which are seen in MBT as
conditions arising in the context of developmentally determined mentalizing problems,
genetic predispositions, attachment, and childhood and adolescent adversity. We argue
that the range of symptoms associated with eating disorders may share the function of
being different attempts at social self-regulation. This is important. The focus of MBT for
eating disorders is then not so much on body weight and shape, for example, but on
dysfunctional relationships and social anxieties, and the mentalizing problems that main-
tain the disorders.
The chapters that make up Part IV consider the use of mentalizing as a framework
for working with children ( Chapter 13 ), adolescents ( Chapter 14 ), families ( Chapter 15 ),
and couples ( Chapter 16 ), and in a range of contexts ( Chapter 17 ). Finally, Chapter 18
discusses the organization of a service using mentalizing to inform the overall assessment
and care of those who present in crisis situations in emergency settings.
Anthony Bateman
Peter Fonagy
Chloe Campbell
Patrick Luyten
Martin Debbanéxii Preface
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
A Note from the Series Editor
I remember when I first met Sarah Marsh, Editor at Cambridge University Press - it
seems like a lifetime ago now. We met at a café in central Edinburgh in June 2017 to
discuss an idea that she had to create a series of books focussed on evidenced based
Psychological Therapies. The idea was simple –the books would be attractive to a trainee
and simultaneously to an expert clinician. We wanted to enable readers to conceptualise
a psychological difficulty using different theoretical models of understanding, but not
become overwhelmed by the volume of information. We saw the need for a series of
books that could be easily read and yet would examine complex concepts in a manage-
able way.
So, when Sarah asked me if I would become the Series Editor, I couldn ’t say no. What
we could never have predicted back then, when making early plans for the series, was that
we would soon face a global pandemic. There were days when we didn ’t even know
whether we could leave our house or if our children could go to school - the world
effectively stopped. Yet through all the chaos, uncertainty and fear, I saw the determin-
ation and successes of those around me shine through. I was in awe of the resilience of
my own son, Patrick, who lived his adolescence in ‘lock-down ’. I watch him now and the
young man he has become –he walks tall with a quiet confidence. I am so proud as he
and his friends laugh together and now enjoy what most of had previously taken for
granted: their freedom at university. In a similar way, I watched the many authors of
these books, most of whom are busy and tired clinicians, continue to dedicate their
precious time to this venture –an incredible achievement through a most challenging
time. They each welcomed me into their academic, clinical and theoretical worlds, from
all over the globe. They have all been an honour to work with. I would personally like to
thank every contributor and author of this series for their hard work, determination and
humour even in the darkest of days. Despite all of the unknowns and the chaos, they kept
going and achieved something wonderful.
I would like to thank Sarah, and Kim Ingram at Cambridge, for giving me the
opportunity to be Series Editor. I have loved every minute of it; it has been a longer
journey than we anticipated but an amazing one and for that I am incredibly grateful.
Sarah and Kim are my friends now –we have literally lived through a global pandemic
together. It has been my absolute pleasure to work together and in collaboration with
Cambridge University Press.
Patricia Graham, Series Editor
Consultant Clinical Psychologist, NHS Lanarkshire, UK
xiii
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Acknowledgments
This book would not be complete without thanking all those around us who have put up
with us over many years and given us ideas that we can take as our own, when they are in
fact theirs and should be attributed as such. To them we apologize and we hope that our
integration of their ideas into the mentalizing framework has done them a modicum of
justice. We thank the series editor, Patricia Graham, for encouraging us to write this
book, and the publishers for waiting patiently for a manuscript that was “nearly finished ”
for a considerable period of time. Finally, the support provided by colleagues at the Anna
Freud Centre and the Research Department of Clinical, Educational and Health
Psychology at University College London with clarifying, editing, and finalizing the
manuscript was second to none —thank you.
xiv
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part I
Chapter
1Overview of the Model
A History of Mentalizing and
Mentalization-Based Treatment
Introduction
How does a person come to intuitively know that a certain look from their partner means
they have had a tough day at work? How can best friends have entire dialogues with each
other without completing a single sentence? For millennia, philosophers have thought
about how the mind works, and twentieth-century playwrights, novelists, singers, and
poets have told stories about what it is like to be inside someone else ’s mind. More
recently, psychologists have used experimental methods to deepen our understanding of
how our minds work. But in our everyday life we are all philosophers of the mind —
almost all of us devote substantial amounts of our “headspace ”to wondering what is
going on in other people ’s heads, and tracking our own thoughts or feelings. There are
several terms that have been used to cover this territory of thinking about thoughts —
mental-state inference, Theory of Mind, intentional stance, reflective functioning, and
mentalizing —all of which signify the ability to represent something beyond, behind, or
simply different from physical objects, moving bodies, and expressive faces. We have
increasingly come to realize that such “mind-wondering ”is pretty central to social
interaction, culture, and morality —and, while we are at it, to politics, religion, and
technology. In the world of mentalization-based treatment (MBT) we have focused on
the concept as a way of making sense of mental health difficulties, and used it to shape a
new form of psychotherapeutic treatment.
We all know what mental states are —they encompass intentions, beliefs, pretense,
irony, and knowledge; the German philosopher Franz Brentano identified that what they
have in common is being about something [1]. The other thing about such mental states
is that they require qualification, such as “I believe that ....”They need this note of
caution because thoughts lack physical substance and are invisible to others —but, of
course, despite being intangible, they can have very real consequences through their
power to direct action. Human beliefs are determinants of behavior with massive
observable consequences; for that reason, they are of far greater significance than the
physical world from which they emerge and with which they have only a loose relation-
ship. To give an example, the last European victim to be burned at the stake for
witchcraft was a woman in the Polish city of Reszel, in 1810. Three years earlier, there
had been a fire in the city for which no cause could be found. A woman —who for years
had been suspected of witchcraft —was accused and tortured, and although she did not
admit to the offense, she was declared guilty and sentenced to be burned at the stake. The
case went through every level of the Prussian court, even reaching the king, but the
sentence was upheld and the execution was carried out. There are many more dramatic
examples of the horrendous impact that false beliefs can have, and human history stands
1
blihd li b C bid  i i 
as testament to the gravity of the consequences of mentalizing when it goes wrong. This
book describes how MBT seeks to harness what we know about the human mind ’s
sometimes troubled fascination with the content of other human minds, in order to help
to improve the treatment of mental health disorders. We shall start in Part I (this chapter
andChapter 2 ) by giving some background on mentalizing, the ideas that are behind it,
and the evidence base to support it. The bulk of the rest of this book is quite practical —
we aim to give a concise overview of MBT and how it is applied in different situations
and with different groups of patients. But first we shall give a theoretical overview.
“Theory of Mind ”was a term first used half a century ago to refer to the capacity of
people to anticipate the actions of a protagonist acting on a false belief (looking for an
object that was, unknown to them, displaced). As the Theory of Mind industry took off, a
wide range of experimental designs and philosophical conceptualizations began to be
squeezed into this shallow suitcase of “having a Theory of Mind ”(e.g., Daniel Dennett ’s
concept of “taking an intentional stance ”)[2]. Because Theory of Mind mixed the
concept with an experimental design, and risked reifying such a multifaceted and
abstract activity, another term —mentalizing —was independently proposed by two
psychologists from dramatically different traditions. Uta Frith introduced the term in
presenting a cognitive account of autism [ 3]. Peter Fonagy launched it from a psycho-
analytic perspective when thinking about the interpersonal difficulties experienced by
patients with a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder (BPD) —in particular, the
clinical experience of working with someone for whom thinking about the content of
other people ’s minds was so aversive and frightening that in certain situations it became
impossible [ 4].
In the meantime, Anthony Bateman and Peter Fonagy —as peers and colleagues in
clinical training and practice —found themselves increasingly aware of and concerned by
the ineffectiveness of help that was currently available to individuals with a diagnosis of
BPD within the UK ’s National Health Service. Reviews of treatments in the 1990s, at the
time when MBT was developed, indicated that 97% of patients with BPD who presented
for treatment in the USA received outpatient care from an average of six therapists. An
analysis of outcomes measured 2 to 3 years after treatment suggested that this treatment
was at best only marginally effective (see [ 5]), and that most patients failed to improve or
even deteriorated —suggesting that the psychosocial treatments being provided actually
impeded patients ’capacity to recover. In Michael Stone ’s classic follow-up of patients, a
recovery rate of 66% was only achieved after 20 years [ 6]. A rethink about treatment
approaches was required, and MBT was developed for the treatment of BPD in the 1990s
to meet some of this need. Perhaps because MBT emerged as a response to this gap in the
clinical options available, it has always been an unashamedly pragmatic approach.
Although its origins are in psychodynamic psychotherapy, it quite openly cherry-picks
whatever techniques are available from other models that enhance robust mentalizing,
and it studiously avoids interventions that have the potential to undermine mentalizing,
in order to minimize potential harmful effects of therapy.
MBT is primarily informed by the idea that mentalizing is a complicated task that we
all wrestle with quite a lot of the time and which, as with most complex skills, it is easy to
do badly, often regardless of how hard we try. Some feelings are complex and hard to pin
down —for example, who can say that they completely understand love? Talking of
which, intense emotions often disrupt mentalizing (for more on this, see Chapter 2 ),
even though understanding feelings is one of the primary tasks of mentalizing.2 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Mentalizing is made even more difficult by the fact that people often do not want to
reveal their mental state, and so the evidence that we have about what they are really
thinking may be very much less than what we need. Often we make assumptions —
sometimes wild ones —about what people are thinking. We sometimes presume mental
states as potential explanations of behavior, and use this theory as an explanation for
others ’reaction to us (e.g., “I have heard them explaining their work far better in the past;
they must have been quite anxious —you know, perhaps they were feeling intimidated by
having to explain what they ’re doing to us ”). This kind of reasoning can be quite simple,
but as situations become more complex and more players are involved, these lines of
thinking become more elaborate (e.g., what does A think I think about B, and how does
B understand A ’s relationship with C?). We offer these examples of how easy it is to
mentalize inaccurately to suggest that humility in relation to mind reading has to be the
order of the day. In fact, perhaps the clearest indicator of poor mentalizing is excessive
certainty when faced with such complexities.
Concluding Remarks
In summary, it seems that we are saying something quite contradictory —that mentaliz-
ing is quite an ordinary and everyday process (we all do it, all of the time, and we all
know that we do it even if we have never thought of ourselves as “mentalizers ”before),
and yet it is also multifaceted, liable to go awry, and sometimes needs careful attention.
This is part of the paradox of human consciousness —its nature and complexities form
one of the great unsolved mysteries of philosophy and science, but most of the time we
use it to plan ahead or mull over why our neighbor is being so annoying as we try to
navigate within our social world. In Chapter 2 we shall explain more about what
mentalizing is and why thinking about it can be so helpful for understanding psycho-
pathology, beginning with the different facets —ordimensions —of mentalizing, and how
we tend to act and think when mentalizing goes “offline. ”
References
1. Brentano F. Psychology from an Empirical
Standpoint . London, UK: Routledge,
1973/1874.
2. Dennett D. The Intentional Stance .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1987.
3. Frith U. Autism: Explaining the Enigma .
Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 1989.4. Fonagy P. On tolerating mental states:
theory of mind in borderline patients.
Bull Anna Freud Centre 1989; 12:9 1–115.
5. Lieb K, Zanarini MC, Schmahl C et al.
Borderline personality disorder. Lancet
2004; 364: 453 –61.
6. Stone MH. The Fate of Borderline
Patients: Successful Outcome and
Psychiatric Practice . New York, NY: The
Guilford Press, 1990.A History of Mentalizing and MBT 3
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part I
Chapter
1Overview of the Model
A History of Mentalizing and
Mentalization-Based Treatment
Introduction
How does a person come to intuitively know that a certain look from their partner means
they have had a tough day at work? How can best friends have entire dialogues with each
other without completing a single sentence? For millennia, philosophers have thought
about how the mind works, and twentieth-century playwrights, novelists, singers, and
poets have told stories about what it is like to be inside someone else ’s mind. More
recently, psychologists have used experimental methods to deepen our understanding of
how our minds work. But in our everyday life we are all philosophers of the mind —
almost all of us devote substantial amounts of our “headspace ”to wondering what is
going on in other people ’s heads, and tracking our own thoughts or feelings. There are
several terms that have been used to cover this territory of thinking about thoughts —
mental-state inference, Theory of Mind, intentional stance, reflective functioning, and
mentalizing —all of which signify the ability to represent something beyond, behind, or
simply different from physical objects, moving bodies, and expressive faces. We have
increasingly come to realize that such “mind-wondering ”is pretty central to social
interaction, culture, and morality —and, while we are at it, to politics, religion, and
technology. In the world of mentalization-based treatment (MBT) we have focused on
the concept as a way of making sense of mental health difficulties, and used it to shape a
new form of psychotherapeutic treatment.
We all know what mental states are —they encompass intentions, beliefs, pretense,
irony, and knowledge; the German philosopher Franz Brentano identified that what they
have in common is being about something [1]. The other thing about such mental states
is that they require qualification, such as “I believe that ....”They need this note of
caution because thoughts lack physical substance and are invisible to others —but, of
course, despite being intangible, they can have very real consequences through their
power to direct action. Human beliefs are determinants of behavior with massive
observable consequences; for that reason, they are of far greater significance than the
physical world from which they emerge and with which they have only a loose relation-
ship. To give an example, the last European victim to be burned at the stake for
witchcraft was a woman in the Polish city of Reszel, in 1810. Three years earlier, there
had been a fire in the city for which no cause could be found. A woman —who for years
had been suspected of witchcraft —was accused and tortured, and although she did not
admit to the offense, she was declared guilty and sentenced to be burned at the stake. The
case went through every level of the Prussian court, even reaching the king, but the
sentence was upheld and the execution was carried out. There are many more dramatic
examples of the horrendous impact that false beliefs can have, and human history stands
1
h di 00 98088960 4002 blihd li b C bid  i i 
as testament to the gravity of the consequences of mentalizing when it goes wrong. This
book describes how MBT seeks to harness what we know about the human mind ’s
sometimes troubled fascination with the content of other human minds, in order to help
to improve the treatment of mental health disorders. We shall start in Part I (this chapter
andChapter 2 ) by giving some background on mentalizing, the ideas that are behind it,
and the evidence base to support it. The bulk of the rest of this book is quite practical —
we aim to give a concise overview of MBT and how it is applied in different situations
and with different groups of patients. But first we shall give a theoretical overview.
“Theory of Mind ”was a term first used half a century ago to refer to the capacity of
people to anticipate the actions of a protagonist acting on a false belief (looking for an
object that was, unknown to them, displaced). As the Theory of Mind industry took off, a
wide range of experimental designs and philosophical conceptualizations began to be
squeezed into this shallow suitcase of “having a Theory of Mind ”(e.g., Daniel Dennett ’s
concept of “taking an intentional stance ”)[2]. Because Theory of Mind mixed the
concept with an experimental design, and risked reifying such a multifaceted and
abstract activity, another term —mentalizing —was independently proposed by two
psychologists from dramatically different traditions. Uta Frith introduced the term in
presenting a cognitive account of autism [ 3]. Peter Fonagy launched it from a psycho-
analytic perspective when thinking about the interpersonal difficulties experienced by
patients with a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder (BPD) —in particular, the
clinical experience of working with someone for whom thinking about the content of
other people ’s minds was so aversive and frightening that in certain situations it became
impossible [ 4].
In the meantime, Anthony Bateman and Peter Fonagy —as peers and colleagues in
clinical training and practice —found themselves increasingly aware of and concerned by
the ineffectiveness of help that was currently available to individuals with a diagnosis of
BPD within the UK ’s National Health Service. Reviews of treatments in the 1990s, at the
time when MBT was developed, indicated that 97% of patients with BPD who presented
for treatment in the USA received outpatient care from an average of six therapists. An
analysis of outcomes measured 2 to 3 years after treatment suggested that this treatment
was at best only marginally effective (see [ 5]), and that most patients failed to improve or
even deteriorated —suggesting that the psychosocial treatments being provided actually
impeded patients ’capacity to recover. In Michael Stone ’s classic follow-up of patients, a
recovery rate of 66% was only achieved after 20 years [ 6]. A rethink about treatment
approaches was required, and MBT was developed for the treatment of BPD in the 1990s
to meet some of this need. Perhaps because MBT emerged as a response to this gap in the
clinical options available, it has always been an unashamedly pragmatic approach.
Although its origins are in psychodynamic psychotherapy, it quite openly cherry-picks
whatever techniques are available from other models that enhance robust mentalizing,
and it studiously avoids interventions that have the potential to undermine mentalizing,
in order to minimize potential harmful effects of therapy.
MBT is primarily informed by the idea that mentalizing is a complicated task that we
all wrestle with quite a lot of the time and which, as with most complex skills, it is easy to
do badly, often regardless of how hard we try. Some feelings are complex and hard to pin
down —for example, who can say that they completely understand love? Talking of
which, intense emotions often disrupt mentalizing (for more on this, see Chapter 2 ),
even though understanding feelings is one of the primary tasks of mentalizing.2 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4002 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Mentalizing is made even more difficult by the fact that people often do not want to
reveal their mental state, and so the evidence that we have about what they are really
thinking may be very much less than what we need. Often we make assumptions —
sometimes wild ones —about what people are thinking. We sometimes presume mental
states as potential explanations of behavior, and use this theory as an explanation for
others ’reaction to us (e.g., “I have heard them explaining their work far better in the past;
they must have been quite anxious —you know, perhaps they were feeling intimidated by
having to explain what they ’re doing to us ”). This kind of reasoning can be quite simple,
but as situations become more complex and more players are involved, these lines of
thinking become more elaborate (e.g., what does A think I think about B, and how does
B understand A ’s relationship with C?). We offer these examples of how easy it is to
mentalize inaccurately to suggest that humility in relation to mind reading has to be the
order of the day. In fact, perhaps the clearest indicator of poor mentalizing is excessive
certainty when faced with such complexities.
Concluding Remarks
In summary, it seems that we are saying something quite contradictory —that mentaliz-
ing is quite an ordinary and everyday process (we all do it, all of the time, and we all
know that we do it even if we have never thought of ourselves as “mentalizers ”before),
and yet it is also multifaceted, liable to go awry, and sometimes needs careful attention.
This is part of the paradox of human consciousness —its nature and complexities form
one of the great unsolved mysteries of philosophy and science, but most of the time we
use it to plan ahead or mull over why our neighbor is being so annoying as we try to
navigate within our social world. In Chapter 2 we shall explain more about what
mentalizing is and why thinking about it can be so helpful for understanding psycho-
pathology, beginning with the different facets —ordimensions —of mentalizing, and how
we tend to act and think when mentalizing goes “offline. ”
References
1. Brentano F. Psychology from an Empirical
Standpoint . London, UK: Routledge,
1973/1874.
2. Dennett D. The Intentional Stance .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1987.
3. Frith U. Autism: Explaining the Enigma .
Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 1989.4. Fonagy P. On tolerating mental states:
theory of mind in borderline patients.
Bull Anna Freud Centre 1989; 12:9 1–115.
5. Lieb K, Zanarini MC, Schmahl C et al.
Borderline personality disorder. Lancet
2004; 364: 453 –61.
6. Stone MH. The Fate of Borderline
Patients: Successful Outcome and
Psychiatric Practice . New York, NY: The
Guilford Press, 1990.A History of Mentalizing and MBT 3
h di 00 98088960 4002 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part I
Chapter
2Overview of the Model
The Supporting Theory of
Mentalization-Based Treatment
Introduction
Given that mentalizing is, as we have described in Chapter 1 , rather difficult and prone to
going wrong, and that it can cause us considerable psychological distress when it does go
wrong, why do we do it so much? Humans are a social species and, in order to support
our survival, natural selection has provided us with the tools necessary to interact with
and manage the hugely complex terrain of our social world. Understanding the thoughts,
intentions, and mental states of our fellow humans is the key to the creation of human
societies and our attainment of dominance over other species on our planet. We
constantly infer thoughts, feelings, and beliefs in the minds of other people, and much
of our mental life is spent engaging with the task of processing social information [ 1].
Many writers and researchers believe that the evolutionary advantages of living in
relatively large social groups were made by possible by humans developing the capacities
to interpret, explain, and predict each other ’s behavior, and using these capacities to
share and accumulate experiences, to plan and collaborate, and to attain joint goals that
they would not have been able to achieve as individuals or as members of smaller groups
[2–4]. There are excellent neuroscientific experimental studies which provide ample
evidence that mentalizing, as indicated by the activation (or inhibition) of the network
of neurons involved in Theory of Mind, is critical for evaluating the morality of others
(including those who are harmful), for predicting how competitors will behave, and for
learning from those who have special information about a shared environment (e.g.,
stock markets) [ 5].
We have argued that vulnerability to mental health disorders is the flipside of the
advantages that mentalizing brings [ 6]. On the basis of data from epidemiological
studies, only one in five people will go through life without experiencing a diagnosable
mental health condition [ 7]. Looking at such prevalence figures from the perspective of
natural selection, it is clear that whatever the neural systems are that underpin mental
disorder, they must have other functions that are critical for survival. A defining feature
of mental disorder is the experience of “wild imagination, ”and we consider that
mentalizing difficulties —the tendency to get caught up in unhelpful ways of imagining
what is going on both for ourselves and for other people —are the price we as a species
pay for the immense benefits of the human imagination [ 6].
The Non-Mentalizing Modes
Mentalizing is a complicated and multifaceted process. We have pinpointed three non-
mentalizing modes , which describe different states of mind that are encountered when
4
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
mentalizing is ineffective, to help clinicians to understand and recognize when a client ’s
mentalizing is poor. These modes are called psychic equivalence ,teleological mode , and
pretend mode .
Psychic Equivalence
Psychic equivalence is a way of thinking that involves assuming that what you are
thinking is what everyone else is thinking, is obviously true, and is the same as external
reality. Mental is equivalent to physical. An example of psychic equivalence in a young
child can be seen in their feelings of fear about being alone in the dark at bedtime
translating into a genuine terror that there is a monster under the bed, or that the
unpalatable cabbage they are being encouraged to eat is poisonous. An adult in a state of
psychic equivalence, if feeling angry and upset, may assume that others around them are
hostile and angry too —potentially generating a destructive interpersonal cycle in which
the other person does become hostile in response to the first person ’s behaviors, which
were prompted by their assumptions.
Teleological Mode
In teleological mode, only the behavioral outcomes of mental states are taken seriously.
Mental states themselves lose their significance. Again, if we think about this in terms of
the pre-mentalizing states of young children, we can see the teleological mode in the ways
that toddlers behave —actions speak louder than words, affection is accompanied by gifts,
kisses, or hugs, and “badly behaved ”toys are physically punished. In adulthood, this
mode may manifest in an individual requiring physical or sexual contact from others in
order to escape their feeling of being unlovable or worthless, or it may play out in a
tendency toward violence or self-harm when feeling overwhelmed or angry.
Pretend Mode
In pretend mode, there is a lack of appropriate connection between one ’s thoughts about
mental states and external reality. The concept of pretend mode was based on observa-
tion of the ways in which young children enjoy using and enacting mental states in play,
but only when they can clearly separate the game from physical reality. When an adult
breaks the pretense by clumsily joining in from the real world, the game is spoiled. In
adults, pretend mode can appear as pseudomentalizing , which is important to recognize
in clinical work —it can involve what seems to be rather elaborate mentalizing, with
plenty of discussion and apparent thought about mental states, but in rather aimless,
contradictory, or meaningless ways. Many of us have been in meetings where possible
points of action are endlessly discussed, but with a sinking background feeling that there
will be little real progress.
We shall refer back to these three modes in our discussions of clinical work, as we
encounter different clinical scenarios and expressions of mentalizing breakdown. It is also
important to bear in mind that these different modes can overlap and be observed at the
same time. It is not uncommon, for example, for the distress generated in a state of psychic
equivalence, because a thought is experienced as real without the moderation of psycho-
logical status, to spill over into teleological mode. For example, the thought “If e e lt e r r i b l e ;
obviously everybody hates me and I am a bad person ”may trigger and converge with the
thought, in teleological mode, “I need to hurt myself to deal with how hateful I feel .”The Supporting Theory of MBT 5
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The Mentalizing Dimensions
To help us understand the how and why of the ways in which mentalizing and non-
mentalizing can take these different forms, we need to appreciate that mentalizing draws
on several different kinds of social-cognitive activities, underpinned by different neuro-
biological processes. We have categorized these into four mentalizing dimensions (which
are sometimes called polarities , as they are not dimensional in the everyday sense):
/C15automatic/controlled
/C15self/other
/C15cognitive/affective
/C15internal/external.
We all move backward and forward along these dimensions in response to changes in
our environment and adjustments in what we are thinking. At times, for example, we
might be focused on our own mental states, while at other moments we might be more
caught up in what we think is in the minds of other people. We often find that
individuals who are experiencing emotional distress or behavioral difficulties tend to
be more “stuck ”at one pole of one or more of the dimensions. We shall briefly explain
these dimensions here, but we shall also refer to them in our account of clinical
processes, to illustrate how thinking about them can help us in our work.
Automatic/Controlled Mentalizing
Most of the time, we mentalize in a fairly automatic way —we do not stop to think very
explicitly or reflectively about what is going on. In fact, when someone is excessively
controlled in their mentalizing, the interpersonal experience can feel rather like hard
work and unspontaneous. To return to the example given at the beginning of Chapter 1 ,
when we meet a partner, flatmate, or friend after work we respond to their demeanor in
quite an immediate, unreflective way. But on registering that they look unhappy,
worried, or preoccupied, we may slow things down a little and start to think in a more
conscious and controlled way about what might be going on for them —was there a
particular problem at work that has been bothering them, and how should we best
respond to their upset in a helpful or sympathetic manner? In that moment, we are
moving along this dimension of mentalizing, from automatic to controlled, in response
to the demands of the situation.
Self/Other Mentalizing
Traditionally, Theory of Mind has focused on the way in which we think about the
mental states of others. Mentalizing theory —and here it reflects some of its origins in
psychoanalysis —assumes that the ability to understand our own mental states cannot be
taken for granted either. Even though we tend to have a lot more information about our
own states (e.g., our physical sensations, our internal narrative voice, an understanding
of what the limits of our knowledge are) than about those of other people, we are still
vulnerable to substantial biases and significant errors when making judgments about the
reasons for our actions [ 8–10], or we may not want to admit to ourselves the real reasons
for our behavior.
Effective mentalizing requires us to be aware of someone else ’s mental states as being
distinct from our own. But because we are such a socially driven species, the mentalizing6 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
of self and other often interfere with each other —for example, the mere awareness of the
presence of another perspective slows down thinking [ 11]. Indeed, there is evidence that
overlapping neural networks are activated when reflecting on the self or others [ 12]. This
neural correspondence reflects the way our own mental experiences (thoughts, feelings,
and memories) can create a template for understanding someone else [ 13,14], just as the
effort to understand others ’thoughts, feelings, and reflections about us (which we call
personal second-order mentalizing) might clarify and elaborate our own sense of our-
selves [ 15–17].
From a clinical perspective, an individual who tends to be more stuck at the “other ”
pole of the self/other dimension might be more vulnerable to being overwhelmed by the
emotions of others, and to being swept up by another ’s perspective. This can leave them
vulnerable to contagious emotional storms and also, in some cases, to exploitation, as
they allow the mental states of another person to dominate them. In contrast, some
individuals who have a strong capacity to mentalize others but who lack emotional
empathy (see this chapter: Cognitive/Affective Mentalizing) can have a tendency to
misuse or exploit others. Meanwhile, an excessive focus on self-mentalizing can deprive
an individual of access to the regulating effects of other people ’s perspectives, and
reduces their social connectedness.
Cognitive/Affective Mentalizing
This mentalizing dimension covers, at the cognitive pole, the capacity to identify, label,
and invoke reasoning about mental states in oneself or in others. The opposite pole,
affective mentalizing, is concerned with the feeling of what is going on —again in oneself
or in others. If an individual is stuck at the affective end, without the labeling and
contextualizing of emotions that cognition provides, they may experience overwhelming
dysregulated emotions, which come to dominate their behavior. The lack of balance and
the absence of contextualizing of feelings can lead to catastrophizing. Cognition adds
reflection and questioning to mentalizing, whereas the domination of emotion leads to
an unnatural lack of hesitancy and to a particular certainty about ideas that emotional
conviction can add to beliefs. Domination by affect potentially makes anything that is
thought feel as if it is real, and leads to an intolerance of alternative ways of seeing things.
We are equally familiar with the constraint that accompanies being stuck at the cognitive
pole. In this state, an individual can describe feelings in the absence of these emotions
actually being experienced. Such an intellectual understanding can serve as helpful
protection against being overwhelmed by emotions; however, in the absence of the
experience of feeling it can feel disconnected from reality, becoming a form of pretend
mode functioning (discussed earlier in this chapter), and it can lack genuine empathy.
Internal/External Mentalizing
The internal/external dimension refers to the possibility of inferring someone ’s mental
states from external cues, such as their facial expressions, as opposed to thinking about
what is going on for them on the basis of what we imagine about their internal state —
that is, what we imagine that they know, think, or believe. An exclusively external
orientation can make a person hypervigilant, constantly looking for external evidence
and judging by appearance. If evidence for attitudes and other internal states has to come
from the outside, there will be a corresponding lack of conviction about one ’s ownThe Supporting Theory of MBT 7
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
intuitions and an excessive need to seek external reassurance. Similarly, we might, for
example, find it difficult sometimes to recognize how anxious we are feeling until we
notice how much we are fidgeting. An excessive external focus can lead to a neglect of the
internal, and the absence of a way of generating a model for how one feels can lead to
overwhelming feelings of “not knowing ”and even emptiness. This vacuum can drive the
individual toward seeking intense experiences to fill the gap. Excessive focus on external
states can also cause an individual to be highly reactive to other people ’s physical actions
and behaviors, even if these actions are not directed at them. This is because the
individual is unable to anchor their response in a coherent understanding of the other
person ’s mental state, which would require contextualizing and creating hypotheses
about the reasons for the other person ’s actions. Meanwhile, an excessive focus on
internal states can lead to unwarranted inferences and complicated suppositions about
another ’s state of mind without a sufficient anchor in external reality —that is, a tendency
toward the pretend mode that we described earlier in this chapter.
We hope that this description of the four dimensions captures some common
mentalizing difficulties. Good or effective mentalizing assumes that there is flexible
“movement ”between the poles of each dimension, achieving a balance between them
in processing mental representations. Depending on the context and subject, ineffective
mentalizing can look quite different. We all have different strengths and weakness
according to where we tend to land on each mentalizing dimension. Although we often
(probably unhelpfully!) talk of “breakdowns ”or“failures ”in mentalizing, as if mentaliz-
ing is a single process that simply stops, these breakdowns can appear in different ways,
depending on how the individual is functioning across the different dimensions.
Developmental Aspects of Mentalizing:
Child/Adolescent/Adult
Mentalizing is a developmental achievement, and the full repertoire of mentalizing skills
emerges over the course of childhood and adolescence. There are two reasons why it is
helpful to understand how mentalizing develops. The first reason is that, when we are
working with children and adolescents, it is useful to know what level of mental-state
understanding we can expect from them, and what signs there might be of problems in
the development of their individual functioning. The second reason why it is useful to
understand the unfurling of ever more complex mentalizing skills across development is
that, from the perspective of developmental psychopathology, it helps us to make sense
of a patient ’s vulnerabilities and how these affect their functioning.
The non-mentalizing modes, discussed earlier in this chapter, were partly inspired by
careful observations of how children operate —recognizing the literality of the toddler ’s
horror of “poisonous ”cabbage, or understanding the precursor of pretend mode in
young children ’s play. Indeed, in some of our earlier work we described these modes as
pre-mentalizing rather than non-mentalizing modes. Moving forward through develop-
ment from toddlers to adolescents, our growing understanding of the heightened and
unstable experience of mentalizing in adolescence helps to explain why this life stage is a
period of particular vulnerability in terms of the emergence of mental health difficulties.
Bertram Malle has provided a helpful summary of the developmental emergence of
mentalizing in what he describes as the “tree of social cognition ”[18]. At the base of
the “tree, ”in the first 6 months of life, infants show capacities that are shared with8 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
non-human primates, such as differentiating between biological and non-biological
agents. They develop a special interest in reading faces, and can detect that biological
agents have goals, in contrast to movement by objects that is not goal directed. By the
end of the first year, they can follow another person ’s gaze (i.e., they show an interest in
the direction of other people ’s attention), they socially reference with others (e.g., they
might look at a caregiver as if to ask “Should I be frightened of this stranger or new
object? ”), and, critically, they can engage in shared social attention —they enjoy the
feeling of looking at things together. After another 6 months, infants are able to detect
intent behind an action and can mimic others, usually to establish social links. Between
the second and third years of life, a capacity for genuine empathy emerges, along with
deliberate imitation and the capacity to infer wishes and desires. During the third and
fourth years, children start inferring knowledge (which can be tested in the well-known
false-belief test of Theory of Mind) and start to show self-knowledge and self-awareness.
Non-human primates can also make inferences about what others want, but the evidence
for their ability to infer false beliefs is debated and, if this ability is present, it is certainly
not robust.
From middle childhood onward, the child develops an ever-increasing sophistication
in ascribing mental states to others. Arguably, this ability continues to improve gradually
right through to young adulthood. For example, by the age of 7 –9 years, children master
third- and fourth-order false beliefs (e.g., “If you think that I think that you think ...”
[19]), and develop increasingly complex explanations of actions [ 20]. At the top of the
“tree”is explaining action in terms of the stable characteristics of an agent (so-called trait
inference). This capacity reflects how the child has come to view the world as being
occupied by people with different behavioral tendencies, based on a sense of “what so-
and-so is like, ”and therefore, by sampling another person ’s actions, we can create a
general picture of them that will help us to predict their behavior in a new situation. Of
course, infants do this implicitly (behaviorally) via non-mentalizing processes from the
earliest days of attachment to their caregivers, but at this point attachment moves to the
level of representation and is experienced in terms of the anticipated mental states of
attachment figures.
A defining feature of adolescence is the increased importance of social relationships,
marked by an increase in social sensitivity [ 21]. There is evidence that adolescents are
more likely to report bad mood and anxiety following an experience of rejection [ 22],
and that they expect less favorable positive feedback from their peers [ 23]. The network
of brain regions involved in mentalizing (especially the medial prefrontal cortex) is more
responsive to social rejection in adolescents than in adults [ 24], perhaps as a result of
greater functional connectivity between the regions of the mentalizing network [ 25].
This brief review of the development of mentalizing across childhood and adoles-
cence has highlighted two things. The first is that mentalizing capacities are based on the
emergence of multiple interlinked components, with explicit, content-led mental state
ascriptions —what we think of as fully fledged mentalizing —developing quite late.
A second repeated theme concerns the role of the relationship between the self and the
other in the emergence of these capacities. The abilities that we describe may be
conceptualized in purely cognitive terms, but the content of mental-state attributions,
especially in the early years when a child is totally dependent on their caregivers, can be
of the utmost seriousness, implying the availability of food, protection, and warmth, or
indeed the opposite —risk, danger, and death. Self-awareness and self-regulation play aThe Supporting Theory of MBT 9
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
critical role in differentiating and modifying numerous mentalizing capacities, thus
providing important functions that make social living possible, and this self-awareness
and self-regulation is supported by the relationships and social environment that con-
struct the sense of self. In the next section we shall describe the interpersonal nature of
these developmental processes in more detail.
The Impact of the Environment on the Emergence
of Mentalizing
How do we acquire our understanding of mind across development? Findings from
neuroscience research show that the ability to mentalize is a prewired evolutionary
adaptation —the process of acquiring increased social cognition, described in the preced-
ing section, is a normative developmental trajectory. However, the achievement of full
and robust mentalizing is dependent on environmental input. There are good reasons for
this—in the same way that we are prewired for language acquisition, but not for the
acquisition of any particular language, we need to be open to learning a different
“language ”for thinking and talking about mental states. We learn to understand mental
states from how others around us frame them. Infants and young children have wants
and feelings, and caregivers “read ”their behaviors —their need for food, or assistance, or
comfort —and offer evidence of intuitive understanding through actions or verbal
responses [ 26]. Carers are predisposed to guess, with typical utterances such as “You
are tired, you have had enough of this game ”or“Oh, it was the shiny silver foil that you
were after! ”Different cultures vary in the interpretations that they give to a child ’s
behavioral reactions [ 27], and even within the same culture caregivers will not give the
same labels to expressions of supposed internal states. However it is expressed, toddlers
rapidly acquire internal-state language from those around them. They like to explore and
often talk confidently about others ’feelings, preferences, desires, and perceptions,
allowing rich communication within families that includes increased empathy but also,
for example, teasing [ 28]. The constant asking of questions by young children —the
notoriously persistent “why ”questions —is, we argue, partly about obtaining informa-
tion, but more fundamentally about reveling in the process of joint attention on a shared
object. The more children hear mental-state words and are exposed to mentalizing talk,
the more their ability to successfully interpret false-belief tasks is likely to improve
[28,29]. Some families engage in a lot of mental-state talk, and their children ’s ability
to mentalize is advanced, whereas others do much less —parents ’self-reported use of
elaborated mentalizing conversation appears to predict higher scores on tasks that assess
Theory of Mind [ 30].
A young child develops a sense of their own mind, and then of other people ’s minds,
through early experiences of having how they are feeling being accurately recognized,
mirrored, and responded to by a caregiver. These interpretations of and responses to
what is going on for children help them to build a sense of who they are and to develop a
sense of agency —that is, the ability to carry an idea of themselves as an active presence
in the world, whose experiences matter, are of interest to those around them, and can
make things happen. The caregiver ’s responses that reflect back to the child what they are
feeling are called “secondary representations. ”It is as a result of having adults around us
to decipher and delineate “who we are ”for us that we can develop a coherent sense of self
(sometimes called self-representation); in that sense selfhood, rather than being all about10 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
individuality, is an intrinsically social construct. Individuals who have not had the
benefit of such secondary representations may have a diminished or less coherent self-
representation (see this chapter: The Alien Self ); these may include individuals who have
been exposed to such responsive care but, for a complex range of possible reasons, have
not been able to benefit from it.
There is plenty of evidence of the importance of being mentalized for a child ’s
development. The significance of parental mentalizing was first revealed in a large empir-
ical study exploring parents ’capacity for reflective functioning, which found that a parent ’s
ability to think about and understand their childhood relationship to their own parents,
measured during pregnancy, strongly predicted their infant ’s attachment security [ 31].
A follow-up study found that antenatal parental mentalizing continued to be a predictor of
the child ’s reflective functioning 17 years later, when the children had grown into young
adults [ 32]. Since this initial research, there has been a great deal of work on the effects of
caregivers ’mentalizing on outcomes for their children. In the area of child attachment
outcomes, a meta-analysis by Zeegers et al. examined the relationships between parental
mentalizing, parental sensitivity, and infant attachment outcomes. This meta-analysis
found that both mentalizing and sensitivity had significant direct effects on infant –parent
attachment after controlling for the effects of each other, which suggests that parental
mentalizing is directly related to infant –parent attachment security [ 33].
As well as evidence for the impact of parental mentalizing on attachment security,
there is also a growing body of evidence which indicates that better parental mentalizing
fosters mentalizing in children [ 34] and in adolescents [ 35,36]. Whereas associations
between parental mentalizing and infant attachment typically represent small effect sizes
(defined as Cohen ’sd¼0:20), the association between parental and infant mentalizing is
typically stronger, representing medium to large effect sizes (Cohen ’sd¼0:50/C00:80).
For instance, Rosso and Airaldi found a particularly strong association between mothers ’
ability to mentalize negative and mixed-ambivalent mental states, but not positive mental
states, and the corresponding ability in their adolescent children ( r¼0:40/C00:50) [ 35].
Findings such as these suggest that the capacity of caregivers to reflect on difficult and
affect-charged mental states is particularly important in the context of the transmission
of mentalizing between generations, from parents to their children.
Studies on mentalizing and adversity during childhood have provided some of the
strongest evidence for the potential role of caregivers ’mentalizing capacities in the
development of their children ’s mentalizing capacity. Early adversity and complex
trauma (i.e., negative experiences in early life involving neglect or abuse, typically within
an attachment/caregiving context) in particular have been shown to have the potential to
severely impair mentalizing. This impairment is apparent in strongly biased mentalizing,
hypersensitivity to the mental states of others, and a defensive inhibition of mentalizing,
or a combination of these features (for reviews, see Borelli et al. [ 37] and Luyten and
Fonagy [ 38]). At the same time, there is increasing evidence that high levels of caregivers ’
reflective functioning, particularly reflective functioning with regard to their own trau-
matic experiences (see Chapter 11 ), may be an important buffer in the relationship
between early adversity and child outcomes (reviewed in Borelli et al. [ 37]). For instance,
higher trauma-related reflective functioning in parents with a history of sexual abuse and
neglect has been shown to be related to lower risk of infant attachment disorganization
[39], and to a substantially lower risk of exposure to childhood sexual abuse in their own
infants [ 37]. These findings are of particular clinical interest as they suggest the value ofThe Supporting Theory of MBT 11
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
both prevention and intervention work, making use of mentalizing, with vulnerable
parents. Finally, mentalizing difficulties reported in childhood are associated with social-
emotional and cognitive problems, such as difficulties in emotion regulation and inter-
personal problems, internalizing and externalizing problems, and difficulties in atten-
tional control, effortful control, and academic achievement (for reviews, see Fonagy and
Luyten [ 40–42]).
Whereas our earlier work tended to heavily emphasize the role of attachment in
supporting or inhibiting the development of mentalizing [ 43,44], more recently our
views have evolved into a more comprehensive set of considerations about the role of
family members, peers, and broader sociocultural factors, such as socioeconomic depriv-
ation, social isolation, and school climate, in the development of mentalizing [ 45,46].
In keeping with this view, there is growing evidence for mentalization-based treatment
(MBT)-related interventions that focus on the family and the broader social context that
surrounds an individual. Several studies have provided evidence of the effectiveness of
MBT in various groups, such as substance-abusing mothers and their infants [47],
fostered and adopted children [48], mothers living in underserved poor urban
communities with children at high risk of maltreatment [ 49,50], individuals supporting
a family member with borderline personality disorder (BPD) [51], and school-based
prevention and intervention programs [52]. These types of family and “system-level ”
interventions might be most effective in addressing the problems that non-mentalizing
social environments (e.g., neighborhoods with high levels of crime and violence, or
schools with a culture of bullying) tend to generate, by creating a mentalizing climate
as a counterweight against competitive, hostile, and aggressive wishes and tendencies.
We are of the view that the social network around an individual serves to support the
recovery of mentalizing when it is inevitably lost in the course of the daily difficulties
encountered in life —the “micro-traumas ”to which we are all continuously exposed.
Connecting to others at moments of stress affords powerful protection against these
problems because it ensures some balanced mentalizing, and thus resilience, in relation
to the experience [ 53,54]. We consider that creating a mentalizing climate around the
individual or family is particularly important for children and young people, and for
providing support to their families/carers (for further discussion of mentalizing-based
interventions that aim to do this, see Chapters 15 and 17). An important additional
aspect of this view is that it acknowledges the need to provide a supportive mentalizing
system around mental health professionals, given the many internal and external pres-
sures and anxieties that they face in their work.
The Alien Self
The idea of the alien self is something we use in MBT to capture the experience of
individuals who, in a high state of stress or distress, find their sense of self to be so
frightened/frightening and incoherent that an “alien self ”steps in. As we shall see in
Chapters 14 and18, the alien self has been particularly useful in understanding some
cases of suicidality, serious acts of self-harm, interpersonal aggression/violence, and
other mental health crises. When we speak of the alien self, we mean that disturbances
in core self, sensory, and cognitive psychological processes lead the individual to experi-
ence various forms of loss in their personal agency. Their experience, which could be
related to bodily, cognitive, or affective (dys)control, is of a “not-me, ”and there is a12 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
failure to integrate the experience of self coherently —essentially, parts of selfhood,
experienced in the here and now, are alienated. We consider this representation to
originate from the internalization of an insensitive or overwhelming caregiver, as a
consequence of the child ’s exposure to failed mirroring by the caregiver. By “mirroring, ”
we mean interactions where the caregiver recognizes the infant ’s mental states and is able
to reflect those states back to the infant in a “marked, ”or regulated, way which shows
that they understand and empathize with the infant ’s feelings but are not overwhelmed
by them. Later in development, hostile or abusive caregiving is managed by the acti-
vation of a split-off part of the self-representation —the alien self —which presents the
child with the possibility of obtaining a degree of control over an uncontrollable social
environment by identifying with the aggressor (the abusive caregiver) using this alien
self; the individual then becomes host to a torturing figure within the self-structure. In a
sense, alien self-representations can help individuals to cope with disturbances of the self;
the emergence of the alien self is an attempt at an emergency rescue from the intense
emotional experiences that the individual is unable to manage or regulate. Although this
defensive process affords something of a sense of temporary control, it also causes an
acute experience of fragmentation and a feeling of being tortured from within. The alien
self is a threat to psychological integrity, and can often lead to behaviors such as self-
harm and suicide attempts that are linked to the affective pressure coming from the alien
self-experience. Importantly, psychological contact with alien self-representations may
also lead to dissociation, which is a hallmark of a mental process coming in as an attempt
to protect psychological self-integrity. The importance of the alien self in clinical work is
considered further in Chapters 10 and12.
As we described in the previous section, the sense of self, and the ongoing coherence
of the sense of self, is partly constructed on the basis of the secondary representations of
who we are that are communicated to us, in the first instance, by our caregivers in early
life. An individual who has missed out on sufficiently benign, coherent, or accurate
secondary representations, or who has difficulty in recognizing and internalizing these
secondary representations (possibly because of a lack of exposure to such representa-
tions), may be particularly vulnerable to developing a fragmented self-structure (i.e., an
alien self ), which is then called upon in response to a chaotic or empty sense of self-
experience. The latter is sometimes called a “black hole ”by individuals with BPD, who
unsurprisingly find it terrifying, as it threatens their very existence.
Attachment and MBT
MBT is strongly shaped by attachment theory —the idea that the development of mentaliz-
ing emerges in the context of attachment relationships has always been central to our
thinking, and evidence from research supports the view that there is a “loose coupling ”
between attachment, emotional sensitivity, and parental mentalizing capacities [ 55].I n
MBT work, a patient ’s attachment experiences and representations will play a key part in
the therapist ’s understanding of the challenges that the patient faces when thinking about
other people ’s mental states. However, in the practice of MBT, it is also vital that the
therapist understands the impact of attachment arousal in the here and now of treatment,
and how the experience of such strong emotions can hinder effective mentalizing.
Brain-imaging studies have shown that the activation of the attachment system
inhibits the neural systems that support mentalizing [ 56–58]. Trauma can activate theThe Supporting Theory of MBT 13
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
attachment system, and attachment trauma may cause chronic hyperactivation. This
explains how some patients may be able to mentalize when they are under little or no
stress; however, arousal related to attachment may cause a collapse of mentalizing at
moments of stress in individuals who are prone to this form of hyperactivation. This has
important implications for clinical work. Any intervention that calls for reflection —for
example, by asking the patient to clarify or elaborate on a thought —is by its very nature
asking the patient to engage in controlled mentalizing. If the topic that the patient is
being asked to reflect on triggers arousal related to attachment, it may be very difficult
for them to engage in such reflective activity. This may be one of the reasons why,
historically, dynamic therapy for BPD was often found to be ineffective —traditional
psychotherapeutic methods trigger the attachment system, both through the nature of
the relationship between therapist and patient and through the subject matter that is
explored in therapy. In effect, the patient is being asked to carry out a potentially
impossible task —to think about mental states in a regulated way while being placed
under circumstances that make such reflection almost impossible.
For all that MBT is about mentalizing, the work of MBT should not involve a
relentless onslaught of reflective mentalizing on the part of the therapist. A patient
who is in a state of high emotion, whose attachment system is ringing alarm bells, and
whose mentalizing has gone “offline ”should not be met with further demands to
mentalize —these will either be ignored or be experienced as insensitive and unhelpful.
Rather, the appropriate response from the therapist is recognition and validation of the
patient ’s feelings at that moment. The reasons for this will unfold in the next sections of
this chapter, in which we shall explain how the capacity for shared attention and thinking
together is made possible by a sense of personal recognition. First, we shall explain how
our clinical experiences directed our thinking in this regard.
Borderline Personality Disorder and MBT
As we mentioned in Chapter 1 , MBT was first developed as a response to an acute awareness
of how few patients with a diagnosis of BPD were receiving the therapeutic help and support
that they needed. MBT was deliberately built on the awareness that a form of treatment was
required that (a) really addressed the clinical needs and real-life experiences and difficulties
endured by these patients, and (b) was sufficiently usable for a broad range of mental health
workers to implement reliably without undergoing years of intensive training.
Given how much thinking about BPD has influenced the development of MBT, we
believe it will be useful to give an overview of the nature of the difficulties associated with
BPD, to help the reader to understand some key elements of the general mentalizing
approach and the rationale for this approach. One of the most common features of BPD
is emotional dysregulation, which involves a hypersensitivity to emotional stimuli that
can spark intense and unstable emotional responses. Individuals with BPD may struggle
to find coping strategies that help to reduce their distress, and the emotional dysregula-
tion is often coupled with impulsive symptoms such as self-injurious behavior (including
impulsive self-harming behaviors), cognitive disturbances (including dissociation), and
interpersonal problems. Individuals with BPD often experience intense anguish, and they
are 50 times as likely to attempt suicide as members of the general population [ 59].
Stress-related dissociation is common in individuals with BPD [60], and can affect
the sense of identity, episodic memory, perception, and consciousness [ 61]. Disruptions14 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
of such fundamental social-cognitive processes can be understood as defensive (i.e., self-
protective) in nature, by which we mean they are adaptations to stressful internal
experiences that function to limit the impact of these experiences on the person (or
their body, as in derealization or emotional numbing). We see the symptoms of BPD as
understandable mental adjustments made by the individual to cope with what would
otherwise be overwhelming subjective experiences of stress or distress [62]. Sometimes
the impulsivity observed in BPD plays out as impulsive aggression [ 63,64]. Aggression
shares with emotional dysregulation an association with high levels of stress and distress
[65], but also features a lack of consideration for the mental state of the person toward
whom the anger is directed [66]. A range of negative behaviors, such as aggressive
outbursts, binge eating, risky sexual behavior, substance abuse, or suddenly ending a
relationship, can be triggered in negative emotional contexts where the individual
perceives these actions as uncontrollable and inevitable reactions to an impossible
(social) situation [ 67,68].
Interpersonal disturbances are widely thought to be central in the work of helping
people with BPD. There is strong evidence that individuals with BPD have difficulty in
developing trust in others, a heightened sensitivity to social exclusion and rejection, and
lengthy histories of conflicted unstable relationships with unresolved conflict about
separating [ 69,70]. Often the histories of individuals who present for treatment amply
explain their reluctance to place trust in social relationships [ 71,72]. Whether interper-
sonal disturbances should be regarded as attempts to manage earlier developmental
problems (e.g., as in transference-focused psychotherapy) or as caused by other difficul-
ties (as conceptualized in dialectical behavior therapy) remains a source of controversy,
but from the pragmatic standpoint of a clinician, both the emotions themselves and their
impact on relationships need to be tackled.
Mentalizing and BPD
A growing literature suggests that mentalizing difficulties are an intrinsic aspect of BPD
and may drive the interpersonal disturbance, affect dysregulation, and impulsivity that
are characteristically shown by individuals with this diagnosis. The mentalizing difficul-
ties found in people with BPD can cover all four of the mentalizing dimensions (which
were outlined in detail earlier in this chapter).
In relation to automatic/controlled mentalizing, the dysregulation and impulsivity
associated with BPD reflect a tendency toward automatic mentalizing. In what was
perhaps the first demonstration of the failure of reflective mentalizing in BPD, Fonagy
et al. showed a dramatically reduced ability of BPD patients to reflect on their own and
others ’mental states in the context of attachment relationships [ 73]; this deficit in
reflective functioning has been shown to be reversible by psychotherapy [ 74]. The
findings on reflective functioning have been replicated by two relatively large studies
[75,76] and confirmed in a recent meta-analysis [ 77].
A number of studies have shown that BPD patients show mentalizing impairments
when tested with the Movie for the Assessment of Social Cognition (MASC), which is
currently probably the best validated and most reliable measure of this mentalizing
domain [ 78–80]. The MASC is a video-based test of mentalizing that requires partici-
pants to recognize the mental states of characters as they interact in an everyday-life
scenario involving relationships. The misinterpretation of interpersonal situationsThe Supporting Theory of MBT 15
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
because of a limited reflective capacity may generate extreme or inappropriate emotions
in social interactions [ 81], particularly if there is also an overemphasis on externally
oriented social cognition.
The self/other mentalizing dimension can often appear in BPD as an excessive focus
on the mental states of others. Within the MBT model, knowledge of self and knowledge
of other are complementary but interdependent. We learn about ourselves from others,
and this self-knowledge helps us to place ourselves in another ’s shoes. We would expect
mentalizing problems to manifest as a reduction in self-knowledge and unstable self-
representations. Another area of mentalizing the self is its role in generating a sense of
ownership over one ’s own actions. Several studies suggest that the experience of agency
may be reduced in people with BPD relative to those without BPD [ 82–84]. There is
emerging evidence of difficulties with self –other differentiation in BPD [ 85], with, for
example, observations of greater proneness to the Rubber Hand Illusion [ 82,86], and
confusion in identifying the self from graded morphed self-images [ 87]. Several investi-
gations have shown that people with BPD are more likely to recognize negative than
positive self-attributes, suggesting distortions in their self-concept toward greater nega-
tivity [ 88–91]. However, these studies gave a less clear picture in relation to the structural
complexity of the self-concept. One study of adolescents and young adults reported that
patients with BPD endorsed a greater number of attributes as being self-related, indicat-
ing a more diffuse sense of self [ 88], whereas another study of adults did not mirror this
observation [ 90]. The differences in the findings of these studies could reflect the
tendency of adolescents with emerging BPD to hypermentalize, which is likely to
decrease with age [ 92]. In line with the greater prominence of the self in BPD, memory
studies suggest that individuals with BPD have enhanced recall of self-relevant social
events uninfluenced by emotional valence [ 93]. A “mind-wandering ”paradigm sug-
gested that self-related thoughts fluctuate more, and are more extreme, in individuals
with BPD [ 91].
The evidence in relation to the internal/external dimension of mentalizing in BPD is
mixed. Accuracy of emotion recognition appears to be reduced for static facial stimuli in
individuals with BPD in some studies [ 94,95], but not in others [ 96–98]. Similarly,
whereas some studies reported that patients with BPD take longer than individuals
without BPD to decode faces with emotional expressions [ 98], other studies did not find
this difference [ 99,100], and a meta-analysis confirmed the absence of a reliably identifi-
able deficit in the speed of emotional face processing in people with BPD [ 101]. There are
also mixed findings regarding facial reactivity to brief emotion-induction videos. One
study reported reduced reactivity in individuals with BPD (effect size ¼–0.67) [ 102],
whereas another found reduced reactivity only to positive emotions, and also reported
that BPD patients displayed more negative and mixed facial emotions in response
to social exclusion than individuals without BPD [ 103]. There is evidence that facial
mimicry is enhanced in BPD. In a task in which participants ’facial muscle activity in
response to dynamic facial expressions was recorded, BPD patients showed enhanced
responses to angry, sad, and disgusted facial expressions, and attenuated responses to
happy and surprised faces [ 104]. This finding suggests a specific rather than general
hypersensitivity to the emotional state of others, expressed by exaggerated responses to
negative social signals and attenuated responses to positive signals. Some studies have
also identified a strong negative attribution bias, with BPD patients attending more
quickly to negative faces and spending more time looking at them [ 105].16 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
A large number of studies have explored mental-state discrimination in BPD. Most of
these studies reported a medium-sized effect across a large number of measures. The
most prominent of these measures is the Reading the Mind in the Eyes test, which has
yielded both the largest reported advantage for mind reading [ 106,107] and the greatest
deficits in those with BPD [ 108,109]. A meta-analysis by Hanegraaf et al. revealed a
substantial and significant heterogeneity between the studies (Q ¼151:55,p<0:0001)
[101]. However, this comprehensive meta-analysis provides extensive and robust evi-
dence that people with BPD tend to be poorer at mental-state discrimination than people
from other clinical populations, including those with other personality disorders (cluster
C, avoidant, and narcissistic personality disorders) and those with major depression.
Obviously this adds empirical support to the MBT approach and justifies our focus on
mentalizing in our therapeutic work with patients with a diagnosis of BPD. BPD tends to
be associated with difficulties in both selecting and displaying optimal social signals
during interpersonal interactions, through facial expressions, language, and caregiver –
infant behavior, and when interpreting the social signals of others.
Not surprisingly, given that the diagnostic criteria for BPD include rejection
sensitivity, in experimental studies of social exclusion it has been found that individuals
with this diagnosis report more severe experiences of ostracism than control participants
without BPD; in fact, BPD patients are more likely to report feelings of exclusion even in
conditions of social inclusion (e.g., [ 110]). There is evidence that rejection sensitivity is
mediated by social-cognitive factors (tolerance of ambiguity, effortful control) and
attachment-related factors (attachment anxiety, feeling of belonging, self-criticism)
[111,112]. In the meta-analysis by Hanegraaf et al., BPD patients were also found to
tend to feel more excluded than individuals with social anxiety disorder, major depres-
sive disorder, or non-suicidal self-injury [ 101]. A failure of mentalizing combined with
the expectation of negative outcomes from social interactions leaves individuals with
BPD vulnerable to misinterpreting such interactions as instances of rejection.
Widening the Lens: Mentalizing in Psychopathology
We hope the description of the mentalizing challenges that individuals with BPD have to
face has helped to provide a good sense of the rationale for the MBT approach. We shall
now explain how and why this thinking can also inform the psychological treatment of
other mental health disorders, ranging from other personality disorders to anxiety and
depression, and to psychosis. This widening application of MBT is based on the view that
mentalizing difficulties are common to many forms of mental health problems.
There is a lively and growing body of research around what is called the general
psychopathology factor ,o r “pf a c t o r ,”in mental disorder. This is the idea that it might be
more useful to understand the many overlapping mental health diagnoses that exist as
sharing a common vulnerability factor, which then interacts with individual circumstances
and genetic tendencies to manifest as a particular set of symptoms. To give quite a crude
example, adolescent boys on the whole are statistically more likely to show externalizing
symptoms, such as conduct disorder, whereas adolescent girls are more likely to develop
internalizing symptoms, such as anxiety or depression. What is more, an adolescent boy
with conduct disorder may well go on to experience depression and anxiety as an adult,
with or without continuing conduct problems. So, across different populations, or across
one individual ’s life course, there will be a range of experiences and behaviors that appearThe Supporting Theory of MBT 17
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
quite different in terms of both outward behavior and emotional experience, but,
according to the thinking around the p factor, the underpinning vulnerability that leads
to all of these different symptoms remains the same —it is just that they play out differently
for different people as a result of a combination of their different social circumstances and
genetic factors. There are various reasons for giving credence to this idea —for example,
how do we make sense of the numerous concurrent and often overlapping difficulties that
people experience? Findings from behavioral genetics and molecular biology are also
consistent with the argument that there is a common underlying factor. Studies of families
and twins tend to show that genetic risk is not specific to particular disorders, but is largely
a transdiagnostic vulnerability factor [ 113–116]. Similarly, a genome study of 17 mental
disorders with over one million participants found that, in terms of genomic markers, the
mental disorders shared common variance risks [ 117].
The argument for the possibility that a single common factor underpins vulnerability
also arises from population studies that use bifactor modeling of symptoms and diagnoses.
Bifactor modeling involves exploring a possible general factor that a broad range of
different variables —in this case symptoms and diagnoses —may share in common. Work
in this area has found that psychiatric disorders are more convincingly explained if a
general psychopathology factor is assumed to exist alongside clusters of symptoms (intern-
alizing, externalizing, and psychosis) and individual mental disorders —for example,
schizophrenia, generalized anxiety disorder, and depression [ 118–120]. Numerous studies
with samples of children, adolescents, and adults indicate that the p factor appears to
capture an underlying propensity for any kind of psychopathology as indicated through
the apparent symptoms [ 121–123].
The emphasis on the p factor leaves us with the question of what this factor actually is,
other than a useful statistical construct. Many studies suggest that all mental disorders
involve a dysfunction of just one or two parts of the brain —the prefrontal cortex and
perhaps the limbic regions [ 124,125]. There may be, and indeed there are very likely to be,
many other areas of the brain that place an individual at risk of having a mental disorder.
In fact, it is increasingly likely that it is not so much the structure of particular parts of the
brain but the connections between different areas that cause these problems [ 126]. So
general psychopathology, or the p factor, or perhaps most accurately the risk of mental
disorder, at the level of the brain, may be to do with irregular connectivity in the cortex of
the brain. This hypothesis is consistent with the growing consensus that psychopathology
is best seen as a dysfunction of brain networks rather than of localized brain regions [ 127].
A study in which high-quality resting-state brain scans were obtained in 6593 children
aged 9 –10 years found that a high p factor was associated with reduced connectivity within
the default mode network (DMN), and increased connectivity between the DMN and
multiple control networks [ 128]. The DMN is active when the mind is not engaged in any
specific cognitive task —that is, when a person is “mind-wandering ”. The DMN overlaps
with and extends beyond the network of brain regions involved in mentalizing. One study
showed that a set of tasks concerned with social cognition (i.e., reasoning about the mental
states of other persons) activates the DMN [ 129]. The DMN is activated in thought
processes such as daydreaming, imagining the perspectives of others, imagining the future,
and recalling autobiographical memories [ 130], and is generally considered to subserve
mentalizing. In other words, vulnerability to psychopathology, as measured by a high p
factor, is associated with anomalies in connectivity in the neural network that is implicated
in mentalizing processes.18 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Neuroscience research has consistently implicated two related major domains of
functioning across most mental health disorders. The first is emotional dysregulation.
Poorly managed emotions interfere with purposeful activity [ 131]. People who regulate
their emotions well have an accurate idea about the risks of a given situation that
triggered emotion, and can direct their attention to what they need to do to cope with
it, use their attention to focus but also to distract themselves if focusing is unlikely to
help, and reassess the risks as the results of their actions unfold [ 132]. Emotional
dysregulation has been shown to be a feature of almost every psychiatric diagnostic
condition [ 133]. Researchers believe that a weakness in emotion regulation can amplify
emotional experience that is going on in the background, cause distortions in the way
children see and experience social situations, and lead to intense emotional reactions just
because the person is anticipating and experiencing an intense feeling. It can generate
inappropriate feelings and lead to sometimes dramatic actions to avoid unpleasant
intense emotion.
The second general domain that is consistently associated with mental disorder is
executive function [ 134]. Executive function is the capacity to control thought and
generally direct information in the appropriate direction relevant to any specific task;
it includes self-regulation, decision making, sequencing of actions, planning, prioritizing,
and navigating new tasks [ 135]. These cognitive processes are deemed to be essential for
healthy functioning. The quality of executive function is thought to affect the p factor.
Individuals with a high p factor score, signifying what we might term high persistent
psychological distress , are oversensitive to difficult social interactions, and they find it
hard to reliably interpret the reasons for others ’actions and put out of their mind
potentially upsetting memories of experiences. This state leaves them vulnerable to
emotional storms.
To return to the role of mentalizing, we can see that because mentalizing supports
executive function and affect regulation, both emotional dysregulation and poor execu-
tive function —the two areas reliably associated with psychopathology —are associated
with poor mentalizing. We do not know where cause and effect lie in relation to
mentalizing here; from a pragmatic clinical perspective, whether mentalizing problems
are the consequence or the cause of emotional dysregulation and failures in executive
function may be something of a “chicken-and-egg ”question. The issue, clinically, is that
all of these processes are closely linked to one another. The restoration of the capacity to
think about mental states, both in oneself and in others, may be critical to making affect
regulation and more protective executive function possible; this provides the rationale
for the application of MBT approaches to a range of mental health disorders. In the next
section, we shall set out why we consider mentalizing to have such great significance for
healthy functioning.
Mentalizing, Social Learning, and Epistemic Trust
We have defined epistemic trust , which is a key part of mentalizing theory, as “trust in the
authenticity and personal relevance of interpersonally transmitted knowledge about how
the social environment works and how best to navigate it ”(Fonagy et al. [ 136], p. 177).
We have argued that mentalizing has a specific function in enabling individuals to
take a position in relation to having epistemic trust in others —something that is vital
if they are to benefit fully from opportunities to learn from others about the world inThe Supporting Theory of MBT 19
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
general and the social world, including themselves, in particular. We suggest that this is
one of the reasons why disruptions in mentalizing appear to be so detrimental to social
functioning [ 6] and so closely linked to vulnerability to any long-term mental disorder,
and why they appear to be associated with the p factor [ 128]. To survive in the socially
complex networks that humans inhabit, we have to be able to learn from other people
[137]. In learning the skills that we need to survive, we observe and listen to experts, we
avoid punishments and gain rewards by imitating others, we make complex strategic
decisions after taking others ’experience and views into account, and throughout all of
this we learn about ourselves through social interactions. Learning efficiently from
others is a central part of human existence. The transmission of information from
parents to children, as well as between peers, constitutes a core mechanism of adaptive
cultural learning, but can also cause maladaptive behaviors, such as antisocial actions,
exaggerated avoidance, and anxiety [ 138].
The development of mentalizing is intricately related to epistemic trust and openness to
social learning —that is, the ability to learn from others by trying to understand what they
have to teach us. Human infants quickly learn to infer a model ’s goal and copy successful
(but not failed) actions, but non-human primates acquire this capacity earlier than humans.
Humans take a slightly different approach to learning. By the age of 3, children start showing
what is called over-imitation, by which we mean that young children readily learn and copy
behaviors that are unnecessarily complicated and do not seem to have a more functional
purpose, if they seem to be the “right ”way of doing things (a simple example would be
learning to eat with a spoon rather than the faster and more efficient method of using one ’s
hands) [ 139]. For a period, young children are prone to unselectively and unreflectively copy
the behavior and acquire the beliefs of the majority of people with whom they interact [ 140],
and will copy a person ’s failed as well as successful attempts to complete a task [ 141]—
something that non-human primates have not been observed to do [ 142]. The reasons for
this are that what the child is learning when, for example, they learn to use a spoon is
complex. They are not only learning how to break up food and transport it to their mouth
[143]. In fact, most small children find it easier to use their hands to eat —but learning to use
a spoon correctly is one tiny example of the huge ocean of cultural and social knowledge that
infants are born into. Trusting the demonstration by reliable elders that spoons are the
correct way to eat, and copying how to use them, is an example of the small steps the young
child starts to make in learning to navigate the world. Relatively inefficient routines are
frequently socially transmitted as part of the cultural knowledge shared by members of a
child ’s community [ 142]. Acquiring such routines is therefore an important developmental
task that allows children to become members of their cultural group. The term “over-
imitation ”does not signify that children imitate knowledgeable adults when they should not.
Rather, the tendency to over-imitate actions that are cognitively opaque is a cultural learning
strategy, presumably identified through natural selection, based on the assumption that
learning to do things that one does not fully understand is beneficial because they are
culturally relevant, despite their opacity to the learner [ 144]. Preschool children ’s detailed
mimicking of new behaviors may represent an openness to learning novel skills, unusual
social norms, and rituals, and thus to affiliating with members of their community [ 145].
Over-imitating declines as mentalizing emerges, but it remains part of culture and of how
humans learn, because a comprehensive understanding of causation is beyond humans even
in relation to the physical world. The predisposition to over-imitate is sustained into
adulthood [ 146], and is enhanced by the social context [ 147,148].20 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
This account of social learning is relevant to our thinking about mentalizing and
MBT because we suggest that learning and trusting others so that we can learn from
them —that is, epistemic trust —is enabled by mentalizing. We have said elsewhere, “If
I feel that I am understood, I will be disposed to learn from the person who understood
me, who I feel is a trustworthy potential collaborator. This will include learning about
myself but also learning about others and about the world I live in ”(Fonagy et al. [ 6],
p. 7). The outcome of this process is what we have called an epistemic match . This sounds
like quite a simple proposition, but there are several mentalizing stages involved in this
process. It requires the listener to (a) have a coherent enough sense of self to be able to
recognize the match in the first place, (b) recognize the image of themselves that the
communicator is describing to them (in a situation where the communicator is somehow
expressing their own perception of the listener), and (c) judge the similarity or difference
between their own self-perception and how the communicator is describing them. In
addition, the process requires the communicator to have mentalized the listener well
enough to have a good understanding of them. Thus epistemic trust as a social process
depends on mentalizing on the part of both the listener and the communicator.
When co-mentalizing as occurs in an epistemic match is achieved, a particular
subjective experience of social cognition is generated, which has been labelled the “we-
mode .”The we-mode is a mental state that describes an interpersonal experience of being
enjoined with someone else, where intentional states are shared with a common purpose
[149,150]. The we-mode triggers trust, which in turn triggers the potential for learning
from the trusted source. The task of restoring mentalizing in MBT is thus undertaken to
(re)open the possibility of experiencing the we-mode and an epistemic match that is
crucial for enabling the social learning that underlies social functioning. In addition,
there is a relational aspect to the we-mode, which generates the feelings of both agency
and belonging that arise from a sense of “jointness, ”or the epistemic connectedness that
shared intentionality creates. It is important to note that the we-mode is not some kind
of merging of minds. The self, with its full sense of agency, remains important; in fact, in
the absence of a robust self that temporarily subverts itself for a joint purpose, access to
the we-mode may be only illusory and achieved by self-distortion. The we-mode is not
an abdication of the awareness of separate mental states, nor is it some sort of psychic
fusion. Rather, it involves holding in mind the idea that others are separate “agents or
persons just as real as oneself ”(Tomasello [ 151], p. 56), with whom we momentarily
share a view of the world, an ambition, a plan, or an understanding that supersedes our
individual perspective. Indeed, the benefits of the we-mode accrue from separate minds
joining together to focus on a shared object; joint attention brings new knowledge and
perspectives that a single mind cannot [ 4]. We shall describe in more detail in the next
sections how disruptions in epistemic trust and in experiencing the we-mode are
implicated in the development of psychopathology.
Trust in BPDM i s t r u s ta saC o r eF e a t u r eo fB P D
An investigation of core dysfunctional beliefs in 288 individuals with a diagnosis of
personality disorder found that the item that best distinguished individuals with a
diagnosis of BPD from those with other personality disorders on the 126-itemThe Supporting Theory of MBT 21
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Personality Belief Questionnaire was “I cannot trust other people ”[152]. Another study
comparing patients with BPD, patients with mood disorder, and control participants
without a mental health diagnosis used a different self-rated instrument, the Trust
Scenario Questionnaire, which taps into interpersonal trust between one person and
another, and reported that patients with BPD scored significantly lower than either of the
other groups [ 153]. These robust findings justify both a behavioral and a developmental
focus on issues of trust in BPD, as well as consideration of the implications for other
social and emotional aspects of the disorder.
Given that mistrust is such a key feature of BPD, it is hardly surprising that
individuals with this disorder rate faces they do not know as less trustworthy and take
longer to make these ratings [ 154], as well as identifying less trustworthiness and
approachability in faces [ 155]. A more recent study replicated the untrustworthiness
bias among BPD patients, who showed more biased trustworthiness and less ability to
discriminate facial expressions than a matched control group [ 156]. The BPD group also
exhibited slower reaction times when appraising ambiguous trustworthiness compared
with the controls. Furthermore, the neural activation of BPD patients during trust-
worthiness ratings, assessed using functional magnetic resonance imaging, evidenced
less activity in the anterior insula and lateral prefrontal cortex compared with the
controls. This decrease in activity was proportional to the degree of trustworthiness bias
and impaired discriminability demonstrated by both the BPD patients and the controls.
D e v e l o p m e n to fE p i s t e m i cM i s t r u s t
We suggest that one of the consequences of childhood adversity is that it can lead to the
establishment of epistemic mistrust —that is, the misattribution of intentions and the
assumption of malevolent motives behind another person ’s actions. Campbell and
colleagues recently published a study of a self-report trait measure of epistemic trust
that distinguishes three dimensions —epistemic trust, mistrust, and credulity (an indica-
tion of lack of discernment) [ 157]. The study found that mistrust and heightened
credulity characterize individuals with histories of childhood adversity. We suggest that,
for these individuals, attachment trauma following neglect in childhood generates a
general background expectation of an imminent rupture of communication between
them (as either listeners or communicators) and others in any social exchange. When an
individual has a history of being repeatedly exposed to the communication of unreliable
or ill-intentioned information, they may learn to reject these communications [ 158,159].
Orme et al. observed BPD symptoms from admission to treatment and to discharge in a
sample of adolescents, and reported a significant negative correlation between BPD
symptoms at admission and participants ’self-reported trust in their parents [ 160]. The
findings support the assumption that lower levels of trust in their parents may lead to an
individual developing stable and rigid dysfunctional beliefs, and untrusting dispositions
toward others in general, during adolescence and adulthood.
The social context of neuro-economic tasks, which tend to quantify interpersonal
trust in monetary terms, seems to affect the performance of BPD patients. A study
contrasted the performance of patients with major depressive disorder or BPD in two
contexts —social interaction and playing against a computer [ 161]. BPD patients behaved
more inconsistently, showing volatile and unpredictable reactions, but only in the
condition involving social interactions. When exposed to social situations, those with22 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
BPD showed a proneness to perceive counterparts as threatening, and this perception
activated untrusting behaviors with trustees. Social interactions trigger the mentalizing
system and bring forth expectations of interpersonal behaviors about the counterpart,
which might explain the BPD patients ’inconsistent behaviors in this study.
Ebert et al. followed up findings related to a potential mediating role of the neuro-
peptide oxytocin [ 162], where abnormalities have been linked to lower interpersonal
trust [ 163]. BPD patients and controls were randomly assigned to receive oxytocin or a
placebo, and were then invited to play a trust game. In this game there is an investor with
a fixed number of points (say, 20), who is asked to give whatever number of points they
would like to a trustee, who will look after the points for them. The trustee automatically
triples the number and then has to decide how many points to give back to the investor.
So if the investor gives 10 points, the trustee then has 30 points to play with and may, for
example, give back half, leaving the investor with 10 points remaining from the start of
the game and a further 15 points, while the trustee now has 15 points. Another round
then takes place. A lot of mentalizing is required in this game. Intentions and causes that
underlie lending/giving behavior between partners are given meaning and determine the
interactional attitudes in the next round —one person ’s behavior (how many points they
give) has an effect on the other ’s mind, which subsequently determines their behavior,
and so on. This study found no correlation between childhood trauma scores and trust
behavior in the control group of people without BPD, whether they had been given
oxytocin or the placebo. The BPD patients who had a history of childhood neglect
showed more limited trusting behavior and gave less money to the trustee, but only in
the oxytocin condition, which activated interpersonal relational experience. It seems that
increased oxytocin levels reduce trusting behaviors in BPD patients with a history of
early parental neglect. These patterns of findings make sense if we assume that oxytocin
generally acts to make social stimuli more salient [ 164], which may have a negative
impact on individuals with a history of social adversity.
These findings and assumptions about the developmental roots of the high level of
mistrust in individuals with BPD can be linked to their rejection sensitivity. The experi-
ence of being rejected could explain their tendency to mistrust. There is evidence from a
study of a non-clinical population that there is a negative correlation between the facial
appraisal of trust from unfamiliar faces and BPD features, which is explained by rejection
sensitivity [ 165]. Rejection sensitivity, particularly its emotional aspect (anxiety and
anger) [ 111,112], is likely to have a role in mediating the relationship between mistrust
and BPD [ 166].
The triggering of emotional arousal would be expected to decrease interpersonal
trust. Masland and Hooley studied groups of non-clinical adults with higher or lower
numbers of BPD descriptive symptoms who rated the trustworthiness of unfamiliar faces
after completing an affective priming paradigm in which they looked at negative, neutral,
or positive images [ 167]. Participants with higher numbers of BPD symptoms made less
trusting appraisals. The negative priming images had a greater impact on the high-BPD
group than on the low-BPD group, which suggests that the influence of negative
emotional states on trust appraisal performance is stronger in individuals with more
BPD symptoms.
One study investigated interpersonal trust in romantic relationships involving indi-
viduals with BPD compared with that in romantic relationships involving controls [ 168].
The authors asked heterosexual couples in which the women had been diagnosed withThe Supporting Theory of MBT 23
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
BPD, and control couples with no psychiatric history, to discuss three topics: neutral
(favorite films), personal (personal fears), and relationship-threatening (possible reasons
for separation from their partner). After each discussion, the participants rated their
partner ’s trustworthiness. The authors expected a lower appraisal of the partner ’s
trustworthiness in the BPD couples than the control couples, especially after the
relationship-threatening discussions. Women with BPD expressed lower trust toward
their partner following the personal or relationship-threatening discussions but not the
neutral discussions. These findings fit with the assumption that emotional arousal has a
negative impact on mentalizing in individuals with BPD [ 169].
Mentalizing and Social Rejection
Social rejection, when repeated and severe, is implicated in the development of almost all
psychiatric disorders [ 170]. Unusual reactivity and vulnerability to social rejection is
used as a criterion in the diagnosis of social anxiety disorder, major depression, BPD,
avoidant personality disorder, premenstrual dysphoric disorder, bulimia nervosa, body
dysmorphic disorder, acute suicidal ideation, and substance/alcohol use disorders,
although the specific behavioral, affective, and neural responses to rejection may differ
among these disorders [ 71]. Social rejection or acceptance is directly linked to self-
perception, which is dependent on mentalizing and is at the core of many mood, anxiety,
and personality disorders.
Feeling rejected interacts with mentalizing. If we know that someone who appears to
be deliberately ignoring us is actually unusually shy, we can rethink why they are
avoiding eye contact with us and feel less rejected by them, because rejection normally
has something to do with how we think the other person might be thinking and feeling
about us. Over-interpreting reactions that are actually neutral as distant, cold, or
uninterested might lead us to ask “Why don ’t they like me? ”Many instances of rejection
are linked to how another ’s thoughts, feelings, or intentions are perceived.
Social rejection has been investigated in the exclusion condition of the Cyberball
paradigm (a virtual ball-toss game), which consistently elicits feelings of social distress.
Here, rejection consists of participants observing that they are not being passed a virtual
ball that is being passed by two avatars belonging to presumed players who are strangers
to the participant. The intensity of the experience of social rejection is such that
Eisenberger and Lieberman have suggested that the social signaling system may have
piggybacked on to the neural system involved in perceiving physical pain (the dorsal
anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula) [ 171,172]. The affective pain signal
indicates the grave risk of broken social bonds that could compromise access to shared
resources, support, and beneficial social relationships.
Sahi and Eisenberger have suggested that the neural underpinnings of social rejection
entail the activation of the mentalizing neural network [ 173], based on findings that the
dorsomedial and ventromedial prefrontal cortex and precuneus are generally active in
the exclusion phase of Cyberball and other rejection paradigms [ 174]. They also argue
that the development of self-conscious emotions and fear of social rejection emerge in
early childhood, associated with increased mentalizing competence and maturation of
mentalizing networks. The characteristic hypermentalizing of adolescents may account
for their heightened sensitivity to social rejection rooted in greater responsiveness of the
mentalizing network at this age. Neural responses to peer acceptance and rejection in24 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
socially anxious early adolescents are greater than those in older adolescents [ 175]o ri n
adults [ 176]. Although Sahi and Eisenberger [ 173] make a case for mentalizing anomalies
mediating the abnormal reactions to social rejection of patients with schizophrenia [ 177]
and individuals with autism [ 178], it is not conclusive.
There is better evidence to support the existence of mentalizing anomalies in individ-
uals with a diagnosis of BPD who respond atypically to social rejection. A significant
number of studies have linked rejection sensitivity to BPD (e.g., [ 179–181]). A large meta-
analysis of 28 Cyberball studies confirmed a robust disposition of individuals with BPD to
expect rejection [ 182]. Individuals diagnosed with BPD perceived that they received fewer
ball tosses compared with the control groups in both the exclusion condition (when they
did not receive the ball as often as others) and inclusion condition (when they received the
ball more often) of Cyberball. They also showed more overall negative affectivity after
exposures to rejection, and an even larger effect following social inclusion. Notably, the
reaction to social inclusion in a situation where participants had been excluded distin-
guished individuals with BPD from typical controls. Mentalizing theory would understand
this effect as part of an inability to overcome a pervasive pre-existing bias toward rejection
underpinning hypervigilance about the intentions of others, and an inability to mentalize a
change in attitude in the context of acceptance. Evidence consistent with this hypothesis
includes the findings that individuals with BPD were impaired in processing positive social
feedback but integrated negative feedback better than controls [ 183], experienced reduced
positive emotions such as pride and happiness after reading self-relevant appreciative
sentences [ 184], and changed their social expectations in response to negative, but not
positive, social feedback [ 185]. These observations are critical from a clinical perspective,
where the therapist often waits in vain for a positive reaction from the patient in response
to their unconditional acceptance and interventions aimed at increasing therapeutic
inclusion, only to encounter the resentment and even deeper suspicion that arises from
the patient ’s confusion in the face of the experience of being accepted.
Trauma and Mentalizing
The mentalizing model originated from understanding of the psychological conse-
quences of trauma (see also Chapter 11 ), with the assumption that one possible outcome
of childhood adversity was a limited capacity for mentalizing, driven by anxiety. A child ’s
fear of understanding the mental states of an individual who poses a genuine threat to
them is understandable, and generalization of this fear to other minds might be expected
[186]. Considerable evidence has accumulated to suggest that limitations in mentalizing
are commonly associated with the experience of trauma, particularly post-traumatic
stress disorder. Differences in mentalizing have been demonstrated in tests of emotional
intelligence [ 187], tests of empathy and compassion [ 188,189], and tests developed
specifically to measure cognitive mentalizing, such as the Faux Pas test and the Strange
Stories task [ 190,191]. Our theoretical approach predicts a bias against internal cues to
mental states (mental-state understanding) but a potential hypersensitivity to external
indicators of mental states (observations) to balance the defensive avoidance of “looking
behind ”the external. In line with this prediction, patients with a history of trauma
appear to show no or only small deficits in emotion-recognition tests [ 192–194].
Our assumption in relation to childhood trauma is rooted in the psychoanalytic history
of MBT, but a rare aspect of this history is shared by modern psychiatry. Anna Freud andThe Supporting Theory of MBT 25
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Dorothy Burlingham, who observed children ’s responses to the bombing of London
during the Second World War, noted that the objective danger a child was in appeared
to be less predictive of a phobic reaction than the mother ’s level of anxiety [ 195]. Their
observations antedated the substantial interest in the vicarious learning of children in the
context of social referencing [ 196,197] and other related, particularly facially transmitted,
ways of deriving emotional information about risk and danger [ 198–200].
In our developmental approach to trauma, we have suggested that adversity becomes
traumatic when it is compounded by the sense that one ’s mind is alone. Normally, an
accessible other mind provides the social referencing that enables one to frame a
frightening and otherwise overwhelming experience [ 186]. Recent experimental studies
have provided strong support for this view. A study of conditioning found that vicarious
safety learning (when participants watch a calm-looking demonstrator modeling safety)
leads to better attenuation of a conditioned threat response than traditional direct safety
learning training when a model is not present [ 201]. This observation suggests that the
mind is programmed to be attuned to socially accessible agents so as to judge the threat
response through the availability of another person, such as an attachment figure.
Three Communication Systems
In drawing out some of the clinical implications of the theory we have covered so far in
this chapter, we have developed the idea that there are three “communication systems ”
which are associated with effective therapeutic help [ 202]. These communication systems
do not just apply to MBT; rather, we suggest that any form of meaningful psychothera-
peutic help tends to involve the communication, internalization, and (re-)application of
new forms of learning about oneself, and about oneself in relation to other people.
Communication System 1: The Teaching and Learning of Content
All different therapeutic schools activate the first communication system when the
clinician conveys to the patient a model for understanding the mind that feels relevant
to the patient and makes them feel recognized and understood. The experience of being
recognized as an independent agent in this way reduces the patient ’s epistemic vigilance
and begins to prime them to become open to social learning. The clinician ’s capacity to
mentalize the patient is crucial to this system, as it requires the clinician to apply and
communicate their therapeutic model in a way that is experienced as meaningful by the
patient, creating an epistemic match. The initial stages of MBT, particularly the MBT-
Introductory group (see Chapter 4 ), attest to the importance of this communication
system, and the ability of the clinician to make mentalizing relevant to how patients
think about themselves and others is key to engagement in treatment. This is the
beginning of patients rethinking themselves and seeing themselves in a different light.
Communication System 2: The Re-Emergence of Mentalizing
When the patient is once again open to social communication in contexts that had previously
been blighted by epistemic disruption, they show increased interest in the clinician ’s mind
and use of thoughts and feelings, which stimulates and strengthens the patient ’sc a p a c i t yf o r
mentalizing: “How does this person see me as they do? ”The not-knowing stance of the
clinician, with assiduous focus on the patient ’s experience, kick-starts this process. The26 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
emergence of mentalizing in the patient leads to a “virtuous circle ”in which curiosity about
mental states and social learning through greater epistemic openness support each other
within the therapeutic relationship.
Communication System 3: Applying Social Learning in the
Wider Environment
Being mentalized by another person frees the patient from their state of temporary or
long-term social isolation, and (re-)activates their capacity to learn. This frees the patient
to grow in the context of relationships outside therapy. This view implies that it is not
just the content and techniques of the therapy, or the insight acquired in the course of
treatment, that are key to its success; perhaps primarily it is the patient ’s capacity for
social learning and thinking about mental states that improves their functioning as they
become able to “use”their environment in a different way. A further implication is, of
course, that there may be a need to intervene at the level of the patient ’s social environ-
ment when necessary or appropriate.
Although we have described the three communication systems as forming a neat,
numerically linear sequence, in fact —particularly for patients who are receiving fairly
lengthy treatment —the process is rather less linear and straightforward. There are
inevitable disruptions, ruptures, and work on repair across treatment, which may involve
the activation of different communication systems, or the overlapping activation of more
than one system at once. An example may involve a patient receiving a knock-back in a
close personal relationship outside therapy, which creates feelings of intense distress and
triggers the emergence of one or more of the non-mentalizing modes described earlier in
this chapter. In such a state of mind, the patient may regard anything that the clinician
says as meaningless, useless, or provocative; communication breaks down and any
expectation that the patient will take in or apply social learning is likely to fail. In this
situation, the clinician needs to go back to the first communication system, in which the
patient ’s state of mind is understood and recognized, and their capacity for thinking and
learning is gently reinstated.
Summary of Empirical Research on MBT
In 2020, a Cochrane Review identified MBT as one of two therapies (the other being
dialectical behavior therapy) with a reasonable evidence base for the treatment of BPD
[203]. A meta-analysis that included 33 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of special-
ized psychotherapies for BPD compared with non-specialized psychotherapies for adult
patients diagnosed with BPD supported the efficacy of MBT in patients with BPD [ 204].
Another meta-analysis of psychological treatments for BPD, which covered 87 studies,
found that MBT (along with schema therapy and reduced dialectical behavior therapy)
was associated with higher than average effect sizes compared with treatment as usual
(TAU), which was associated with lower than average effect sizes [ 205]. A review of
RCTs found that MBT for BPD tended to be associated with medium to large or very
large effect sizes on a range of outcome measures, including BPD symptoms, educational
attainment, and interpersonal functioning [ 206]. A systematic review similarly con-
cluded that MBT is associated with significant improvements in BPD symptom severity,
comorbid symptom severity, and quality of life [ 207].The Supporting Theory of MBT 27
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Bateman and Fonagy tested the effectiveness of MBT as a treatment for BPD in a
series of RCTs. A day-hospital program of MBT was investigated in outcome studies
culminating in an 8-year follow-up study —the longest follow-up of treatment for BPD
conducted to date [ 208]. Compared with TAU, MBT achieved decreases in suicide
attempts, emergency-room visits, inpatient admissions, medication and outpatient treat-
ment use, and impulsivity. Far fewer patients in the MBT group than in the TAU group
met the criteria for BPD at follow-up (13% versus 87%). Patients in the MBT group also
showed greater improvements in interpersonal and occupational functioning.
An intensive outpatient MBT program was found to be more effective than struc-
tured clinical management for BPD at the end of the 18-month treatment period [ 209],
particularly for patients with more than two personality disorder diagnoses [ 210].
Compared with TAU, the outpatient MBT treatment resulted in lower rates of suicidal
behavior and non-suicidal self-injury, and fewer hospitalizations. The primary outcome
measure of 6-month periods free of suicidal behaviors, severe self-injurious behaviors,
and hospitalization showed improvements from 0% to 43% in the structured clinical
management group and 73% in the MBT group. In addition, the MBT group showed
improved social adjustment and reduced depression, symptom distress, and interper-
sonal distress [ 209]. An 8-year follow-up of this study found that, of the 73% of the
sample who agreed to participate, a significantly higher proportion of patients in the
MBT group (74%, compared with 51% in the structured clinical management control
group) still met the primary criteria for recovery [ 211]. Finally, an RCT of MBT for
comorbid BPD and antisocial personality disorder found that MBT was effective in
reducing symptoms such as hostility, paranoia, anger, and frequency of self-injurious
behavior and suicide attempts, and achieved improvements in negative mood, general
psychiatric symptoms, interpersonal problems, and social adjustment [ 212].
An RCT in Denmark that investigated the efficacy of MBT compared with a less
intensive manualized supportive group therapy in patients with BPD found that MBT
achieved better results in terms of clinician-rated Global Assessment of Functioning
[213]. These results were sustained 18 months later [ 214]. In a second study in Denmark,
patients who were treated with partial hospitalization followed by group MBT showed
significant improvements after treatment (average duration 2 years) on a range of
measures, including Global Assessment of Functioning, hospitalizations, and vocational
status, with further improvements at 2-year follow-up [ 215]. A multi-site RCT in the
Netherlands that compared day-hospital MBT with specialist TAU in patients with BPD
found that both forms of treatment were effective, although the MBT program was
associated with higher patient acceptability, indicated by significantly lower early drop-
out (9% for MBT versus 34% for TAU) [ 216].
Another study in the Netherlands investigated the effectiveness of an 18-month
manualized program of MBT in 45 patients with severe BPD [ 217]. Patients showed
significant positive changes in symptom distress, social and interpersonal functioning,
and personality pathology and functioning, and effect sizes were moderate to large;
however, it should be noted that this study did not use a control group. A naturalistic
longitudinal study in Norway that compared psychodynamic group-based treatment and
MBT found that greater clinical severity of BPD was associated with poorer outcomes in
the group-based treatment, whereas it had no significant effect on treatment outcome in
the MBT group [ 218]. This observation supports Bateman and Fonagy ’s finding that
MBT may be particularly indicated for patients with more severe BPD [ 210].28 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
An RCT compared a form of MBT for eating disorders and specialist supportive
clinical management for patients with eating disorders and symptoms of BPD. This
study had a high dropout rate, with only 15 of the 68 participants who were eligible for
randomization (22%) completing the 18-month follow-up, making the results difficult to
interpret. However, MBT was associated with a greater reduction in patients ’concerns
about body shape and weight as assessed by the Eating Disorder Examination [ 219].
In an RCT of MBT for adolescents (MBT-A) (see also Chapter 14 ), 80 adolescents
who presented to mental health services and had engaged in self-harm in the preceding
month were randomized to MBT or TAU; 97% were diagnosed with depression, and
73% met the criteria for BPD. At the end of 12 months of treatment, MBT-A was found
to be more successful than TAU in reducing self-harm and symptoms of depression. On
the basis of self-report, the recovery rate was 44% for MBT-A and 17% for TAU, whereas
on the basis of interview assessment the recovery rates were 57% and 32%, respectively.
There was also a greater reduction in depressive symptoms and BPD diagnoses and traits
in the MBT-A group. Both groups showed significant reductions in self-harm and risk-
taking behavior, based on Risk-Taking and Self-Harm Inventory scores, following both a
linear and a quadratic pattern. The group × time interaction term was also significant for
both self-harm and risk taking, indicating that the linear decrease was significantly
greater for the MBT-A group on both variables. At 12 months, self-harm scores were
significantly lower for the MBT-A group [ 220]. However, a recent Cochrane Review of
treatments for self-harm in adolescents has suggested that more evidence for effective-
ness is needed for MBT-A [ 221].
An uncontrolled pilot study in Denmark of 34 female adolescents with BPD who
participated in 12 months of structured mentalization-based group therapy found that of
the 25 adolescents who completed the study, 23 displayed improvements in BPD
symptoms, depression, self-harm, peer and parent attachment, mentalizing, and general
psychopathology. Enhanced trust in peers and parents in combination with improved
mentalizing capacity was associated with a greater reduction in borderline symptoms,
pointing to a candidate mechanism for the efficacy of the treatment [ 222]. On the basis
of this pilot study, an RCT was developed to compare group MBT with TAU (which
involved individual supportive care) for 112 adolescents with BPD in an outpatient
setting; this study found that both treatments had similar effectiveness. The authors
suggest that group MBT might be better indicated as an early-stage intervention, and that
a group MBT program also including individual sessions should be tested [ 223]. Finally,
a naturalistic multi-informant study of MBT in 118 adolescent inpatients with personal-
ity pathology symptoms found that the participants improved on general and personality
pathology measures, and in terms of health-related and generic quality of life. These
improvements were clinically important as well as statistically significant, particularly in
internalizing domains [ 224].
Concluding Remarks
In Part II of this book we shall discuss the translation of this developmental, evidence-
based theory into clinical practice. To summarize, the central question is how to help
patients to generate robust and effective mentalizing that will be conducive to construct-
ive personal and social functioning in their life. Better mentalizing, particularly when
attachment processes are activated, fuels epistemic learning within the social world andThe Supporting Theory of MBT 29
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
allows personal change over time. MBT is designed to stimulate this pathway of change,
and is organized as a coherent set of interventions that are systematically applied over
time to help the patient to learn about and practice mentalizing skills in their everyday
life, while taking into account how attachment anxiety and other stressors can under-
mine the stability and effective use of mentalizing.
References
1. Meyer ML, Davachi L, Ochsner KN,
Lieberman MD. Evidence that default
network connectivity during rest
consolidates social information. Cereb
Cortex 2019; 29: 1910 –20.
2. Bloom P. Religion is natural. Dev Sci
2007; 10: 147 –51.
3. Dunbar RI, Shultz S. Evolution in the
social brain. Science 2007; 317:
1344 –7.
4. Tomasello M. Becoming Human:
A Theory of Ontogeny . Cambridge, MA:
The Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press, 2019.
5. Park BK, Kim M, Young L. An
examination of accurate versus “biased ”
mentalizing in moral economic decision-
making. In: Gilead M, Ochsner K, eds.
The Neural Basis of Mentalizing . Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2021; 537 –53.
6. Fonagy P, Campbell C, Constantinou M
et al. Culture and psychopathology: an
attempt at reconsidering the role of social
learning. Dev Psychopathol 2022; 34:
1205 –20.
7. Schaefer JD, Caspi A, Belsky DW et al.
Enduring mental health: prevalence and
prediction. J Abnorm Psychol 2017; 126:
212–24.
8. Nisbett RE, Ross L. Human Interface:
Strategies and Shortcomings of Social
Judgment . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall, 1980.
9. Nisbett RE, Wilson TD. Telling more
than we can know: verbal reports on
mental processes. Psychol Rev 1977; 84:
231–59.
10. Johansson P, Hall L, Sikstrom S, Olsson
A. Failure to detect mismatches between
intention and outcome in a simple
decision task. Science 2005; 310: 116 –9.11. Samson D, Apperly IA, Braithwaite JJ
et al. Seeing it their way: evidence for
rapid and involuntary computation of
what other people see. J Exp Psychol Hum
Percept Perform 2010; 36: 1255 –66.
12. Beeney JE, Hallquist MN, Ellison WD,
Levy KN. Self-other disturbance in
borderline personality disorder: neural,
self-report, and performance-based
evidence. Personal Disord 2016; 7:
28–39.
13. Bradford EE, Jentzsch I, Gomez JC. From
self to social cognition: Theory of Mind
mechanisms and their relation to
Executive Functioning. Cognition 2015;
138:2 1–34.
14. Gordon RM. Simulation, predictive
coding, and the shared world. In: Gilead
M, Ochsner K, eds. The Neural Basis of
Mentalizing . Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2021; 237 –56.
15. Cooley CH. Human Nature and the Social
Order , revised ed. New York, NY:
Shocken Books, 1964/1902.
16. Mead GH. Mind, Self, and Society .
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
1934.
17. Fonagy P, Gergely G, Jurist E, Target M.
Developmental issues in normal
adolescence and adolescent breakdown.
In:Affect Regulation, Mentalization, and
the Development of the Self . New York,
NY: Other Press LLC, 2002;
317–40.
18. Malle BF. The tree of social cognition:
hierarchically organized capacities of
mentalizing. In: Gilead M, Ochsner K,
eds. The Neural Basis of Mentalizing .
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2021;
337–70.
19. Osterhaus C, Koerber S, Sodian B. Scaling
of advanced Theory-of-Mind tasks. Child
Dev2016; 87: 1971 –91.30 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
20. Atance CM, Metcalf JL, Martin-Ordas G,
Walker CL. Young children ’s causal
explanations are biased by post-action
associative information. Dev Psychol
2014; 50: 2675 –85.
21. Somerville LH. Special issue on the
teenage brain: Sensitivity to social
evaluation. Curr Dir Psychol Sci 2013; 22:
121–7.
22. Sebastian C, Viding E, Williams KD,
Blakemore SJ. Social brain development
and the affective consequences of
ostracism in adolescence. Brain Cogn
2010; 72: 134 –45.
23. Moor BG, Guroglu B, Op de Macks ZA
et al. Social exclusion and punishment of
excluders: neural correlates and
developmental trajectories. Neuroimage
2012; 59: 708 –17.
24. Sebastian CL, Tan GC, Roiser JP et al.
Developmental influences on the neural
bases of responses to social rejection:
implications of social neuroscience for
education. Neuroimage 2011; 57:
686–94.
25. Burnett S, Blakemore SJ. Functional
connectivity during a social emotion task
in adolescents and in adults. Eur
J Neurosci 2009; 29: 1294 –301.
26. de Villiers JG. The role(s) of language in
theory of mind. In: Gilead M, Ochsner K,
eds. The Neural Basis of Mentalizing .
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2021;
423–48.
27. Aival-Naveh E, Rothschild-Yakar L,
Kurman J. Keeping culture in mind: a
systematic review and initial
conceptualization of mentalizing from a
cross-cultural perspective. Clin Psychol:
Sci Pract 2019; 26: e12300.
28. Dunn J, Brophy M. Communication
relationships and individual differences in
children ’s understanding of mind. In:
Astington JW, Baird JA, eds. Why
Languages Matter for Theory of Mind .
New York, NY: Oxford University Press,
2005; 50 –69.
29. Meins E, Fernyhough C, Arnott B et al.
Mind-mindedness and theory of mind:
mediating roles of language andperspectival symbolic play. Child Dev
2013; 84: 1777 –90.
30. Ebert S, Peterson C, Slaughter V, Weinert
S. Links among parents ’mental state
language, family socioeconomic status,
and preschoolers ’theory of mind
development. Cogn Dev 2017; 44:
32–48.
31. Fonagy P, Steele M, Moran GS et al.
Measuring the ghost in the nursery: a
summary of the main findings of the
Anna Freud Centre/University College
London parent-child study. Bull Anna
Freud Centre 1991; 14: 115 –31.
32. Steele H, Perez A, Segal F, Steele M.
Maternal Adult Attachment Interview
(AAI) collected during pregnancy
predicts reflective functioning in AAIs
from their first-born children 17 years
later. Int J Dev Sci 2016; 10: 117 –24.
33. Zeegers MAJ, Colonnesi C, Stams GJM,
Meins E. Mind matters: a meta-analysis
on parental mentalization and sensitivity
as predictors of infant-parent attachment.
Psychol Bull 2017; 143: 1245 –72.
34. Meins E, Fernyhough C, Wainwright R
et al. Maternal mind-mindedness and
attachment security as predictors of
theory of mind understanding. Child Dev
2002; 73: 1715 –26.
35. Rosso AM, Airaldi C. Intergenerational
transmission of reflective functioning.
Front Psychol 2016; 7: 1903.
36. Rosso AM, Viterbori P, Scopesi AM. Are
maternal reflective functioning and
attachment security associated with
preadolescent mentalization? Front
Psychol 2015; 6: 1134.
37. Borelli JL, Cohen C, Pettit C et al.
Maternal and child sexual abuse history:
an intergenerational exploration of
children ’s adjustment and maternal
trauma-reflective functioning. Front
Psychol 2019; 10: 1062.
38. Luyten P, Fonagy P. Mentalizing and
trauma. In: Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds.
Handbook of Mentalizing in Mental
Health Practice , 2nd ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Publishing, 2019;
79–99.The Supporting Theory of MBT 31
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
39. Berthelot N, Ensink K, Bernazzani O et al.
Intergenerational transmission of
attachment in abused and neglected
mothers: the role of trauma-specific
reflective functioning. Infant Ment Health
J2015; 36: 200 –12.
40. Fonagy P, Luyten P. A multilevel
perspective on the development of
borderline personality disorder. In:
Cicchetti D, ed. Developmental
Psychopathology. Vol. 3: Maladaptation
and Psychopathology , 3rd ed. New York,
NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2016; 726 –92.
41. Fonagy P, Luyten P. Conduct problems in
youth and the RDoC approach: a
developmental, evolutionary-based view.
Clin Psychol Rev 2018; 64:5 7–76.
42. Luyten P, Fonagy P. The stress –reward –
mentalizing model of depression: an
integrative developmental cascade
approach to child and adolescent
depressive disorder based on the Research
Domain Criteria (RDoC) approach. Clin
Psychol Rev 2018; 64:8 7–98.
43. Fonagy P. Attachment and borderline
personality disorder. J Am Psychoanal
Assoc 2000; 48: 1129 –46.
44. Fonagy P, Steele M, Steele H et al. The
capacity for understanding mental states:
the reflective self in parent and child and
its significance for security of attachment.
Infant Ment Health J 1991; 12: 201 –18.
45. Fonagy P, Luyten P, Allison E, Campbell
C. What we have changed our minds
about: Part 1. Borderline personality
disorder as a limitation of resilience.
Borderline Personal Disord Emot Dysregul
2017; 4: 11.
46. Fonagy P, Luyten P, Allison E, Campbell
C. What we have changed our minds
about: Part 2. Borderline personality
disorder, epistemic trust and the
developmental significance of social
communication. Borderline Personal
Disord Emot Dysregul 2017; 4:9 .
47. Suchman NE, DeCoste C, Borelli JL,
McMahon TJ. Does improvement in
maternal attachment representations
predict greater maternal sensitivity, child
attachment security and lower rates ofrelapse to substance use? A second test of
Mothering from the Inside Out treatment
mechanisms. J Subst Abuse Treat 2018;
85:2 1–30.
48. Redfern S, Wood S, Lassri D et al. The
Reflective Fostering Programme:
background and development of a new
approach. Adopt Foster 2018; 42: 234 –48.
49. Slade A, Holland ML, Ordway MR et al.
Minding the Baby®: enhancing parental
reflective functioning and infant
attachment in an attachment-based,
interdisciplinary home visiting program.
Dev Psychopathol 2020; 32: 123 –37.
50. Byrne G, Sleed M, Midgley N et al.
Lighthouse Parenting Programme:
description and pilot evaluation of
mentalization-based treatment to address
child maltreatment. Clin Child Psychol
Psychiatry 2019; 24: 680 –93.
51. Bateman A, Fonagy P. A randomized
controlled trial of a mentalization-based
intervention (MBT-FACTS) for families
of people with borderline personality
disorder. Personal Disord 2019; 10:
70–79.
52. Fonagy P, Twemlow SW, Vernberg EM
et al. A cluster randomized controlled
trial of child-focused psychiatric
consultation and a school systems-
focused intervention to reduce
aggression. J Child Psychol Psychiatry
2009; 50: 607 –16.
53. Fonagy P, Allison E, Campbell C.
Mentalizing, resilience, and epistemic
trust. In: Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds.
Handbook of Mentalizing in Mental
Health Practice , 2nd ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association
Publishing, 2019; 63 –77.
54. Fonagy P, Steele M, Steele H et al. The
Emanuel Miller Memorial Lecture 1992.
The theory and practice of resilience.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 1994; 35:
231–57.
55. Luyten P, Campbell C, Allison E, Fonagy
P. The mentalizing approach to
psychopathology: state of the art and
future directions. Annu Rev Clin Psychol
2020; 16: 297 –325.32 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
56. Bartels A, Zeki S. The neural correlates of
maternal and romantic love. Neuroimage
2004; 21: 1155 –66.
57. Zeki S, Romaya JP. Neural correlates of
hate. PLoS One 2008; 3: e3556.
58. Nolte T, Bolling DZ, Hudac CM et al.
Brain mechanisms underlying the impact
of attachment-related stress on social
cognition. Front Hum Neurosci 2013; 7:
816.
59. Pompili M, Girardi P, Ruberto A,
Tatarelli R. Suicide in borderline
personality disorder: a meta-analysis.
Nord J Psychiatry 2005; 59: 319 –24.
60. Korzekwa MI, Dell PF, Links PS et al.
Dissociation in borderline personality
disorder: a detailed look. J Trauma
Dissociation 2009; 10: 346 –67.
61. Miller CE, Townsend ML, Grenyer BFS.
Understanding chronic feelings of
emptiness in borderline personality
disorder: a qualitative study. Borderline
Personal Disord Emot Dysregul 2021; 8:
24.
62. Vermetten E, Spiegel D. Trauma and
dissociation: implications for borderline
personality disorder. Curr Psychiatry Rep
2014; 16: 434.
63. Ende G, Cackowski S, Van Eijk J et al.
Impulsivity and aggression in female BPD
and ADHD patients: association with
ACC glutamate and GABA
concentrations.
Neuropsychopharmacology 2016; 41:
410–18.
64. Sebastian A, Jung P, Krause-Utz A et al.
Frontal dysfunctions of impulse control –
a systematic review in borderline
personality disorder and attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. Front Hum
Neurosci 2014; 8: 698.
65. Krause-Utz A, Keibel-Mauchnik J, Ebner-
Priemer U et al. Classical conditioning in
borderline personality disorder: an fMRI
study. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci
2016; 266: 291 –305.
66. Bateman A, Bolton R, Fonagy P.
Antisocial personality disorder: a
mentalizing framework. Focus 2013; 11:
178–86.67. Cackowski S, Reitz AC, Ende G et al.
Impact of stress on different components
of impulsivity in borderline personality
disorder. Psychol Med 2014; 44:
3329 –40.
68. Jacob GA, Zvonik K, Kamphausen S et al.
Emotional modulation of motor response
inhibition in women with borderline
personality disorder: an fMRI study.
J Psychiatry Neurosci 2013; 38: 164 –72.
69. Lis S, Bohus M. Social interaction in
borderline personality disorder. Curr
Psychiatry Rep 2013; 15: 338.
70. King-Casas B, Sharp C, Lomax-Bream L
et al. The rupture and repair of
cooperation in borderline personality
disorder. Science 2008; 321: 806 –10.
71. Reinhard MA, Dewald-Kaufmann J,
Wustenberg T et al. The vicious circle of
social exclusion and psychopathology: a
systematic review of experimental
ostracism research in psychiatric
disorders. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin
Neurosci 2020; 270: 521 –32.
72. Jowett S, Karatzias T, Albert I. Multiple
and interpersonal trauma are risk factors
for both post-traumatic stress disorder
and borderline personality disorder: a
systematic review on the traumatic
backgrounds and clinical characteristics
of comorbid post-traumatic stress
disorder/borderline personality disorder
groups versus single-disorder groups.
Psychol Psychother 2020; 93: 621 –38.
73. Fonagy P, Leigh T, Steele M et al. The
relation of attachment status, psychiatric
classification, and response to
psychotherapy. J Consult Clin Psychol
1996; 64:2 2–31.
74. Levy KN, Meehan KB, Kelly KM et al.
Change in attachment patterns and
reflective function in a randomized
control trial of transference-focused
psychotherapy for borderline personality
disorder. J Consult Clin Psychol 2006; 74:
1027 –40.
75. Fischer-Kern M, Schuster P, Kapusta ND
et al. The relationship between
personality organization, reflective
functioning, and psychiatric classificationThe Supporting Theory of MBT 33
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
in borderline personality disorder.
Psychoanal Psychol 2010; 27: 395 –409.
76. Gullestad FS, Johansen MS, Høglend P
et al. Mentalization as a moderator of
treatment effects: findings from a
randomized clinical trial for personality
disorders. Psychother Res 2013; 23:
674–89.
77. Bora E. A meta-analysis of theory of mind
and ‘mentalization ’in borderline
personality disorder: a true neuro-social-
cognitive or meta-social-cognitive
impairment? Psychol Med 2021; 51:
2541 –51.
78. Preissler S, Dziobek I, Ritter K et al. Social
cognition in borderline personality
disorder: evidence for disturbed
recognition of the emotions, thoughts,
and intentions of others. Front Behav
Neurosci 2010; 4: 182.
79. Ritter K, Dziobek I, Preissler S et al. Lack
of empathy in patients with narcissistic
personality disorder. Psychiatry Res 2011;
187: 241 –7.
80. Sharp C, Pane H, Ha C et al. Theory of
mind and emotion regulation difficulties
in adolescents with borderline traits. JA m
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2011; 50:
563–73.
81. Dziobek I, Preissler S, Grozdanovic Z
et al. Neuronal correlates of altered
empathy and social cognition in
borderline personality disorder.
Neuroimage 2011; 57: 539 –48.
82. Bekrater-Bodmann R, Chung BY, Foell J
et al. Body plasticity in borderline
personality disorder: a link to
dissociation. Compr Psychiatry 2016; 69:
36–44.
83. Pavony MT, Lenzenweger MF.
Somatosensory processing and borderline
personality disorder features: a signal
detection analysis of proprioception and
exteroceptive sensitivity. J Personal Disord
2013; 27: 208 –21.
84. Pavony MT, Lenzenweger MF.
Somatosensory processing and borderline
personality disorder: pain perception and
a signal detection analysis of
proprioception and exteroceptivesensitivity. Personal Disord 2014; 5:
164–71.
85. De Meulemeester C, Lowyck B, Luyten P.
The role of impairments in self-other
distinction in borderline personality
disorder: a narrative review of recent
evidence. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2021;
127: 242 –54.
86. Neustadter ES, Fineberg SK, Leavitt J
et al. Induced illusory body ownership in
borderline personality disorder. Neurosci
Conscious 2019; 2019 : niz017.
87. De Meulemeester C, Lowyck B,
Panagiotopoulou E et al. Self –other
distinction and borderline personality
disorder features: evidence for egocentric
and altercentric bias in a self –other facial
morphing task. Personal Disord 2021; 12:
377–88.
88. Auerbach RP, Tarlow N, Bondy E et al.
Electrocortical reactivity during self-
referential processing in female youth
with borderline personality disorder. Biol
Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging
2016; 1: 335 –44.
89. Beeney JE, Stepp SD, Hallquist MN et al.
Attachment and social cognition in
borderline personality disorder:
specificity in relation to antisocial and
avoidant personality disorders. Personal
Disord 2015; 6: 207 –15.
90. Vater A, Schroder-Abe M, Weissgerber S
et al. Self-concept structure and
borderline personality disorder: evidence
for negative compartmentalization.
J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 2015; 46:
50–58.
91. Kanske P, Schulze L, Dziobek I et al. The
wandering mind in borderline personality
disorder: instability in self- and other-
related thoughts. Psychiatry Res 2016;
242: 302 –10.
92. Sharp C, Ha C, Carbone C et al.
Hypermentalizing in adolescent
inpatients: treatment effects and
association with borderline traits.
J Personal Disord 2013; 27:3–18.
93. Winter D, Koplin K, Schmahl C et al.
Evaluation and memory of social events
in borderline personality disorder: effects34 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
of valence and self-referential context.
Psychiatry Res 2016; 240:1 9–25.
94. Ritzl A, Csukly G, Balazs K, Egerhazi A.
Facial emotion recognition deficits and
alexithymia in borderline, narcissistic,
and histrionic personality disorders.
Psychiatry Res 2018; 270: 154 –9.
95. Lowyck B, Luyten P, Vanwalleghem D
et al. What ’s in a face? Mentalizing in
borderline personality disorder based on
dynamically changing facial expressions.
Personal Disord 2016; 7:7 2–9.
96. Bertsch K, Krauch M, Stopfer K et al.
Interpersonal threat sensitivity in
borderline personality disorder: an eye-
tracking study. J Pers Disord 2017; 31:
647–70.
97. Fenske S, Lis S, Liebke L et al. Emotion
recognition in borderline personality
disorder: effects of emotional information
on negative bias. Borderline Personal
Disord Emot Dysregul 2015; 2: 10.
98. Bertsch K, Gamer M, Schmidt B et al.
Oxytocin and reduction of social threat
hypersensitivity in women with
borderline personality disorder. Am
J Psychiatry 2013; 170: 1169 –77.
99. Kobeleva X, Seidel EM, Kohler C et al.
Dissociation of explicit and implicit
measures of the behavioral inhibition and
activation system in borderline
personality disorder. Psychiatry Res 2014;
218: 134 –42.
100. Dyck M, Habel U, Slodczyk J et al.
Negative bias in fast emotion
discrimination in borderline personality
disorder. Psychol Med 2009; 39: 855 –64.
101. Hanegraaf L, van Baal S, Hohwy J,
Verdejo-Garcia A. A systematic review
and meta-analysis of ‘Systems for Social
Processes ’in borderline personality and
substance use disorders. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 2021; 127: 572 –92.
102. Renneberg B, Heyn K, Gebhard R,
Bachmann S. Facial expression of
emotions in borderline personality
disorder and depression. J Behav Ther
Exp Psychiatry 2005; 36: 183 –96.
103. Staebler K, Renneberg B, Stopsack M
et al. Facial emotional expression inreaction to social exclusion in borderline
personality disorder. Psychol Med 2011;
41: 1929 –38.
104. Matzke B, Herpertz SC, Berger C et al.
Facial reactions during emotion
recognition in borderline personality
disorder: a facial electromyography study.
Psychopathology 2014; 47: 101 –10.
105. Schulze L, Schmahl C, Niedtfeld I. Neural
correlates of disturbed emotion
processing in borderline personality
disorder: a multimodal meta-analysis.
Biol Psychiatry 2016; 79:9 7–106.
106. Fertuck EA, Jekal A, Song I et al.
Enhanced ‘Reading the Mind in the Eyes ’
in borderline personality disorder
compared to healthy controls. Psychol
Med 2009; 39: 1979 –88.
107. Frick C, Lang S, Kotchoubey B et al.
Hypersensitivity in borderline personality
disorder during mindreading. PLoS One
2012; 7: e41650.
108. Berenson KR, Dochat C, Martin CG et al.
Identification of mental states and
interpersonal functioning in borderline
personality disorder. Personal Disord
2018; 9: 172 –81.
109. Anupama V, Bhola P, Thirthalli J, Mehta
UM. Pattern of social cognition deficits in
individuals with borderline personality
disorder. Asian J Psychiatr 2018; 33:
105–12.
110. Brown RC, Plener PL, Groen G et al.
Differential neural processing of social
exclusion and inclusion in adolescents
with non-suicidal self-injury and young
adults with borderline personality
disorder. Front Psychiatry 2017; 8: 267.
111. Sato M, Fonagy P, Luyten P. Rejection
sensitivity and borderline personality
disorder features: a mediation model of
effortful control and intolerance of
ambiguity. Psychiatry Res 2018; 269:
50–55.
112. Sato M, Fonagy P, Luyten P. Rejection
sensitivity and borderline personality
disorder features: the mediating roles of
attachment anxiety, need to belong, and
self-criticism. J Pers Disord 2020; 34:
273–88.The Supporting Theory of MBT 35
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
113. Franic S, Dolan CV, Borsboom D et al.
Three-and-a-half-factor model? The
genetic and environmental structure
of the CBCL/6-18 internalizing
grouping. Behav Genet 2014; 44:
254–68.
114. Lahey BB, Van Hulle CA, Singh AL et al.
Higher-order genetic and environmental
structure of prevalent forms of child and
adolescent psychopathology. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 2011; 68: 181 –9.
115. Pettersson E, Anckarsater H, Gillberg C,
Lichtenstein P. Different
neurodevelopmental symptoms have a
common genetic etiology. J Child Psychol
Psychiatry 2013; 54: 1356 –65.
116. Pettersson E, Larsson H, Lichtenstein P.
Common psychiatric disorders share the
same genetic origin: a multivariate sibling
study of the Swedish population. Mol
Psychiatry 2016; 21: 717 –21.
117. Anttila V, Bulik-Sullivan B, Finucane HK
et al. Analysis of shared heritability in
common disorders of the brain. Science
2018; 360: eaap8757.
118. Caspi A, Moffitt TE. All for one and one
for all: mental disorders in one
dimension. Am J Psychiatry 2018; 175:
831–44.
119. Caspi A, Houts RM, Belsky DW et al. The
p factor: one general psychopathology
factor in the structure of psychiatric
disorders? Clin Psychol Sci 2014; 2:
119–37.
120. Lahey BB, Applegate B, Hakes JK et al. Is
there a general factor of prevalent
psychopathology during adulthood?
J Abnorm Psychol 2012; 121: 971 –7.
121. Lahey BB, Krueger RF, Rathouz PJ et al.
Validity and utility of the general factor of
psychopathology. World Psychiatry 2017;
16: 142 –4.
122. Smith GT, Atkinson EA, Davis HA et al.
The general factor of psychopathology.
Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2020; 16:
75–98.
123. Patalay P, Fonagy P, Deighton J et al.
A general psychopathology factor in early
adolescence. Br J Psychiatry 2015; 207:
15–22.124. Macdonald AN, Goines KB, Novacek
DM, Walker EF. Prefrontal mechanisms
of comorbidity from a transdiagnostic
and ontogenic perspective. Dev
Psychopathol 2016; 28: 1147 –75.
125. Wise T, Radua J, Via E et al. Common
and distinct patterns of grey-matter
volume alteration in major depression
and bipolar disorder: evidence from
voxel-based meta-analysis. Mol Psychiatry
2017; 22: 1455 –63.
126. Hinton KE, Lahey BB, Villalta-Gil V et al.
White matter microstructure correlates of
general and specific second-order factors
of psychopathology. Neuroimage Clin
2019; 22: 101705.
127. Protzner AB, An S, Jirsa V. Network
modulation in neuropsychiatric disorders
using the virtual brain. In: Diwadkar VA,
Eickhoff SB, eds. Brain Network
Dysfunction in Neuropsychiatric Illness .
Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nature
Switzerland AG, 2021; 153 –70.
128. Sripada C, Angstadt M, Taxali A et al.
Widespread attenuating changes in brain
connectivity associated with the general
factor of psychopathology in 9- and 10-
year olds. Transl Psychiatry 2021; 11: 575.
129. Jack AI, Dawson AJ, Begany KL et al.
fMRI reveals reciprocal inhibition
between social and physical cognitive
domains. Neuroimage 2013; 66: 385 –401.
130. Ekhtiari H, Paulus M. Preface:
Neuroscience for addiction medicine:
from prevention to rehabilitation. Prog
Brain Res 2016; 224: xxv –xxvi.
131. Beauchaine TP. Future directions in
emotion dysregulation and youth
psychopathology. J Clin Child Adolesc
Psychol 2015; 44: 875 –96.
132. Gross JJ. Emotion regulation: conceptual
and empirical foundations. In: Gross JJ,
ed.Handbook of Emotion Regulation , 2nd
ed. New York, NY: The Guilford Press,
2014; 3 –20.
133. Beauchaine TP, Cicchetti D. Emotion
dysregulation and emerging
psychopathology: a transdiagnostic,
transdisciplinary perspective. Dev
Psychopathol 2019; 31: 799 –804.36 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
134. McTeague LM, Huemer J, Carreon DM
et al. Identification of common neural
circuit disruptions in cognitive control
across psychiatric disorders. Am
J Psychiatry 2017; 174: 676 –85.
135. Banich MT. Executive function: the
search for an integrated account. Curr Dir
Psychol Sci 2009; 18:8 9–94.
136. Fonagy P, Campbell C, Bateman A.
Mentalizing, attachment, and epistemic
trust in group therapy. Int J Group
Psychother 2017; 67: 176 –201.
137. Masten CL, Morelli SA, Eisenberger NI.
An fMRI investigation of empathy for
‘social pain ’and subsequent prosocial
behavior. Neuroimage 2011; 55: 381 –8.
138. Espinosa L, Golkar A, Olsson A.
Mentalizing in value-based vicarious
learning. In: Gilead M, Ochsner K, eds.
The Neural Basis of Mentalizing . Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2021; 517 –36.
139. Hoehl S, Keupp S, Schleihauf H et al.
‘Over-imitation ’: a review and appraisal
of a decade of research. Dev Rev 2019; 51:
90–108.
140. Lyons DE, Damrosch DH, Lin JK et al.
The scope and limits of overimitation in
the transmission of artefact culture. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2011; 366:
1158 –67.
141. Huang C-T, Heyes C, Charman T.
Preschoolers ’behavioural reenactment of
“failed attempts ”: the roles of intention-
reading, emulation and mimicry. Cogn
Dev2006; 21:3 6–45.
142. Clay Z, Tennie C. Is overimitation a
uniquely human phenomenon? Insights
from human children as compared to
bonobos. Child Dev 2018; 89:
1535 –44.
143. Gergely G, Csibra G. Sylvia ’s recipe:
human culture, imitation, and pedagogy.
In: Enfield NJ, Levinson SC, eds. Roots of
Human Sociality: Culture, Cognition, and
Human Interaction . London: Berg Press,
2006; 229 –55.
144. Alt ınok N, Hernik M, Király I, Gergely G.
Acquiring sub-efficient and efficient
variants of novel means by integrating
information from multiple social modelsin preschoolers. J Exp Child Psychol 2020;
195: 104847.
145. Nielsen M. The social glue of cumulative
culture and ritual behavior. Child Dev
Perspect 2018; 12: 264.
146. Flynn E, Smith K. Investigating the
mechanisms of cultural acquisition. Soc
Psychol 2012; 43: 185 –95.
147. Gruber T, Deschenaux A, Frick A,
Clement F. Group membership
influences more social identification than
social learning or overimitation in
children. Child Dev 2019; 90: 728 –45.
148. Marsh LE, Ropar D, Hamilton AFC. Are
you watching me? The role of audience
and object novelty in overimitation. J Exp
Child Psychol 2019; 180: 123 –30.
149. Gallotti M, Frith CD. Social cognition in
the we-mode. Trends Cogn Sci 2013; 17:
160–65.
150. Higgins J. Cognising with others in the
we-mode: a defence of ‘first-person
plural ’social cognition. Rev Philos Psychol
2020; 12: 803 –24.
151. Tomasello M. A Natural History of
Human Morality . Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2016.
152. Butler AC, Brown GK, Beck AT, Grisham
JR. Assessment of dysfunctional beliefs in
borderline personality disorder. Behav
Res Ther 2002; 40: 1231 –40.
153. Botsford J, Schulze L, Bohlander J,
Renneberg B. Interpersonal trust:
development and validation of a self-
report inventory and clinical application
in patients with borderline personality
disorder. J Pers Disord 2021; 35: 447 –68.
154. Fertuck EA, Grinband J, Stanley B. Facial
trust appraisal negatively biased in
borderline personality disorder.
Psychiatry Res 2013; 207: 195 –202.
155. Nicol K, Pope M, Sprengelmeyer R et al.
Social judgement in borderline
personality disorder. PLoS One 2013; 8:
e73440.
156. Fertuck EA, Grinband J, Mann JJ et al.
Trustworthiness appraisal deficits in
borderline personality disorder are
associated with prefrontal cortex, notThe Supporting Theory of MBT 37
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
amygdala, impairment. Neuroimage Clin
2019; 21: 101616.
157. Campbell C, Tanzer M, Saunders R et al.
Development and validation of a self-
report measure of epistemic trust. PLoS
One 2021; 16: e0250264.
158. Mascaro O, Sperber D. The moral,
epistemic, and mindreading components
of children ’s vigilance towards deception.
Cognition 2009; 112: 367 –80.
159. Fonagy P, Luyten P, Allison E. Epistemic
petrification and the restoration of
epistemic trust: a new conceptualization
of borderline personality disorder and its
psychosocial treatment. J Pers Disord
2015; 29: 575 –609.
160. Orme W, Bowersox L, Vanwoerden S
et al. The relation between epistemic trust
and borderline pathology in an adolescent
inpatient sample. Borderline Personal
Disord Emot Dysregul 2019; 6: 13.
161. Preuss N, Brandle LS, Hager OM et al.
Inconsistency and social decision making
in patients with Borderline Personality
Disorder. Psychiatry Res 2016; 243:
115–22.
162. Ebert A, Kolb M, Heller J et al.
Modulation of interpersonal trust in
borderline personality disorder by
intranasal oxytocin and childhood
trauma. Soc Neurosci 2013; 8: 305 –13.
163. Theodoridou A, Rowe AC, Penton-Voak
IS, Rogers PJ. Oxytocin and social
perception: oxytocin increases perceived
facial trustworthiness and attractiveness.
Horm Behav 2009; 56: 128 –32.
164. Shamay-Tsoory SG, Abu-Akel A. The
social salience hypothesis of oxytocin.
Biol Psychiatry 2016; 79: 194 –202.
165. Miano A, Fertuck EA, Arntz A, Stanley B.
Rejection sensitivity is a mediator
between borderline personality disorder
features and facial trust appraisal. J Pers
Disord 2013; 27: 442 –56.
166. Preti E, Casini E, Richetin J et al.
Cognitive and emotional components of
rejection sensitivity: independent
contributions to adolescent self- and
interpersonal functioning. Assessment
2020; 27: 1230 –41.167. Masland SR, Hooley JM. When trust does
not come easily: negative emotional
information unduly influences
trustworthiness appraisals for individuals
with borderline personality features.
J Pers Disord 2020; 34: 394 –409.
168. Miano A, Fertuck EA, Roepke S, Dziobek
I. Romantic relationship dysfunction in
borderline personality disorder —a
naturalistic approach to trustworthiness
perception. Personal Disord 2017; 8:
281–6.
169. Fonagy P, Luyten P. A developmental,
mentalization-based approach to the
understanding and treatment of
borderline personality disorder. Dev
Psychopathol 2009; 21: 1355 –81.
170. Hsu DT, Jarcho JM. “Next up for
psychiatry: rejection sensitivity and the
social brain. ”Neuropsychopharmacology
2021; 46: 239 –40.
171. Eisenberger NI, Lieberman MD. Why
rejection hurts: a common neural alarm
system for physical and social pain.
Trends Cogn Sci 2004; 8: 294 –300.
172. Eisenberger NI. The pain of social
disconnection: examining the shared
neural underpinnings of physical and
social pain. Nat Rev Neurosci 2012; 13:
421–34.
173. Sahi RS, Eisenberger NI. Why don ’t you
like me? The role of the mentalizing
network in social rejection. In: Gilead M,
Ochsner K, eds. The Neural Basis of
Mentalizing . Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2021; 613 –28.
174. Vijayakumar N, Cheng TW, Pfeifer JH.
Neural correlates of social exclusion
across ages: a coordinate-based meta-
analysis of functional MRI studies.
Neuroimage 2017; 153: 359 –68.
175. Smith AR, Nelson EE, Kircanski K et al.
Social anxiety and age are associated with
neural response to social evaluation
during adolescence. Dev Cogn Neurosci
2020; 42: 100768.
176. Jarcho JM, Tanofsky-Kraff M, Nelson EE
et al. Neural activation during anticipated
peer evaluation and laboratory meal
intake in overweight girls with and38 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
without loss of control eating.
Neuroimage 2015; 108: 343 –53.
177. Gradin VB, Waiter G, Kumar P et al.
Abnormal neural responses to social
exclusion in schizophrenia. PLoS One
2012; 7: e42608.
178. Sebastian C, Blakemore SJ, Charman T.
Reactions to ostracism in adolescents with
autism spectrum conditions. J Autism
Dev Disord 2009; 39: 1122 –30.
179. Feldman S, Downey G. Rejection
sensitivity as a mediator of the impact of
childhood exposure to family violence on
adult attachment behavior. Dev
Psychopathol 1994; 6: 231 –47.
180. Gao S, Assink M, Cipriani A, Lin K.
Associations between rejection sensitivity
and mental health outcomes: a meta-
analytic review. Clin Psychol Rev 2017; 57:
59–74.
181. Zhang W, Hu N, Ding X, Li J. The
relationship between rejection sensitivity
and borderline personality features: a
meta-analysis. Adv Psychol Sci 2021; 29:
1179 –94.
182. Cavicchioli M, Maffei C. Rejection
sensitivity in borderline personality
disorder and the cognitive-affective
personality system: a meta-analytic
review. Personal Disord 2020; 11:1–12.
183. Korn CW, La Rosee L, Heekeren HR,
Roepke S. Social feedback processing in
borderline personality disorder. Psychol
Med 2016; 46: 575 –87.
184. Reichenberger J, Eibl JJ, Pfaltz MC et al.
Don ’t praise me, don ’t chase me:
emotional reactivity to positive and
negative social-evaluative videos in
patients with borderline personality
disorder. J Pers Disord 2017; 31:7 5–89.
185. Liebke L, Koppe G, Bungert M et al.
Difficulties with being socially accepted:
an experimental study in borderline
personality disorder. J Abnorm Psychol
2018; 127: 670 –82.
186. Allen JG, Fonagy P, Bateman AW. The
role of mentalizing in treating attachment
trauma. In: Vermetten E, Lanius R, eds.
The Hidden Epidemic: The Impact of Early
Life Trauma on Health and Disease . NewYork, NY: Cambridge University Press,
2010; 247 –56.
187. Janke K, Driessen M, Behnia B et al.
Emotional intelligence in patients with
posttraumatic stress disorder, borderline
personality disorder and healthy controls.
Psychiatry Res 2018; 264: 290 –96.
188. Palgi S, Klein E, Shamay-Tsoory SG.
Oxytocin improves compassion toward
women among patients with PTSD.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 2016; 64:
143–9.
189. Mazza M, Tempesta D, Pino MC et al.
Neural activity related to cognitive and
emotional empathy in post-traumatic
stress disorder. Behav Brain Res 2015;
282:3 7–45.
190. Nietlisbach G, Maercker A, Rossler W,
Haker H. Are empathic abilities impaired
in posttraumatic stress disorder? Psychol
Rep2010; 106: 832 –44.
191. Mazza M, Giusti L, Albanese A et al.
Social cognition disorders in military
police officers affected by posttraumatic
stress disorder after the attack of An-
Nasiriyah in Iraq 2006. Psychiatry Res
2012; 198: 248 –52.
192. Nazarov A, Frewen P, Oremus C et al.
Comprehension of affective prosody in
women with post-traumatic stress
disorder related to childhood abuse. Acta
Psychiatr Scand 2015; 131: 342 –9.
193. Passardi S, Peyk P, Rufer M et al.
Impaired recognition of positive
emotions in individuals with
posttraumatic stress disorder, cumulative
traumatic exposure, and dissociation.
Psychother Psychosom 2018; 87:
118–20.
194. Bell CJ, Colhoun HC, Frampton CM et al.
Earthquake brain: altered recognition and
misclassification of facial expressions are
related to trauma exposure but not
posttraumatic stress disorder. Front
Psychiatry 2017; 8: 278.
195. Freud A, Burlingham DT. The Writings of
Anna Freud. Vol. 3. Infants Without
Families: Reports on the Hampstead
Nurseries, 1939-1945 . New York, NY:
International Universities Press, 1973.The Supporting Theory of MBT 39
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
196. Klinnert MD, Campos JJ, Sorce JF et al.
Emotions as behavior regulations: social
referencing in infancy. In: Plutchhik R,
Kellerman H, eds. Emotion: Theory,
Research, and Experience . New York, NY:
Academic Press, 1983; 57 –86.
197. Sorce JF, Emde RN, Campos J, Klinnert
MD. Maternal emotional signaling: its
effect on the visual cliff behavior of 1-
year-olds. Dev Psychol 1985; 21: 195 –200.
198. Askew C, Field AP. Vicarious learning
and the development of fears in
childhood. Behav Res Ther 2007; 45:
2616 –27.
199. Debiec J, Olsson A. Social fear learning:
from animal models to human function.
Trends Cogn Sci 2017; 21: 546 –55.
200. Olsson A, Knapska E, Lindstrom B. The
neural and computational systems of
social learning. Nat Rev Neurosci 2020;
21: 197 –212.
201. Golkar A, Haaker J, Selbing I, Olsson A.
Neural signals of vicarious extinction
learning. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2016;
11: 1541 –9.
202. Bateman A, Campbell C, Luyten P,
Fonagy P. A mentalization-based
approach to common factors in the
treatment of borderline personality
disorder. Curr Opin Psychol 2018; 21:
44–9.
203. Storebø OJ, Stoffers-Winterling JM,
Völlm BA et al. Psychological therapies
for people with borderline personality
disorder. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2020; 5: CD012955.
204. Cristea IA, Gentili C, Cotet CD et al.
Efficacy of psychotherapies for borderline
personality disorder: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry 2017;
74: 319 –28.
205. Rameckers SA, Verhoef REJ, Grasman R
et al. Effectiveness of psychological
treatments for borderline personality
disorder and predictors of treatment
outcomes: a multivariate multilevel meta-
analysis of data from all design types.
J Clin Med 2021; 10: 5622.
206. Volkert J, Hauschild S, Taubner S.
Mentalization-based treatment forpersonality disorders: efficacy,
effectiveness, and new developments.
Curr Psychiatry Rep 2019; 21: 25.
207. Vogt KS, Norman P. Is mentalization-
based therapy effective in treating the
symptoms of borderline personality
disorder? A systematic review. Psychol
Psychother 2019; 92: 441 –64.
208. Bateman A, Fonagy P. 8-year follow-up of
patients treated for borderline personality
disorder: mentalization-based treatment
versus treatment as usual. Am J Psychiatry
2008; 165: 631 –8.
209. Bateman A, Fonagy P. Randomized
controlled trial of outpatient
mentalization-based treatment versus
structured clinical management for
borderline personality disorder. Am
J Psychiatry 2009; 166: 1355 –64.
210. Bateman A, Fonagy P. Impact of clinical
severity on outcomes of mentalisation-
based treatment for borderline
personality disorder. Br J Psychiatry 2013;
203: 221 –7.
211. Bateman A, Constantinou MP, Fonagy P,
Holzer S. Eight-year prospective follow-
up of mentalization-based treatment
versus structured clinical management for
people with borderline personality
disorder. Personal Disord 2021; 12: 291 –9.
212. Bateman A, O ’Connell J, Lorenzini N
et al. A randomised controlled trial of
mentalization-based treatment versus
structured clinical management for
patients with comorbid borderline
personality disorder and antisocial
personality disorder. BMC Psychiatry
2016; 16: 304.
213. Jørgensen CR, Freund C, Boye R et al.
Outcome of mentalization-based and
supportive psychotherapy in patients with
borderline personality disorder: a
randomized trial. Acta Psychiatr Scand
2013; 127: 305 –17.
214. Jørgensen CR, Bøye R, Andersen D et al.
Eighteen months post-treatment
naturalistic follow-up study of
mentalization-ba sed therapy and
supportive group treatment of
borderline personality disorder: clinical40 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
outcomes and functioning. Nord Psychol
2014; 66: 254 –73.
215. Petersen B, Toft J, Christensen NB et al.
A 2-year follow-up of mentalization-
oriented group therapy following day
hospital treatment for patients with
personality disorders. Personal Ment
Health 2010; 4: 294 –301.
216. Laurenssen EMP, Luyten P, Kikkert MJ
et al. Day hospital mentalization-based
treatment v. specialist treatment as usual
in patients with borderline personality
disorder: randomized controlled trial.
Psychol Med 2018; 48: 2522 –9.
217. Bales D, Bateman A. Partial
hospitalization settings. In: Bateman A,
Fonagy P, eds. Handbook of Mentalizing
in Mental Health Practice . Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Publishing, 2012;
197–226.
218. Kvarstein EH, Pedersen G, Folmo E et al.
Mentalization-based treatment or
psychodynamic treatment programmes
for patients with borderline personality
disorder –the impact of clinical severity.
Psychol Psychother 2019; 92:
91–111.
219. Robinson P, Hellier J, Barrett B et al. The
NOURISHED randomised controlled
trial comparing mentalisation-based
treatment for eating disorders (MBT-ED)with specialist supportive clinical
management (SSCM-ED) for patients
with eating disorders and symptoms of
borderline personality disorder. Trials
2016; 17: 549.
220. Rossouw TI, Fonagy P. Mentalization-
based treatment for self-harm in
adolescents: a randomized controlled
trial. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
2012; 51: 1304 –13.
221. Witt KG, Hetrick SE, Rajaram G et al.
Interventions for self-harm in children
and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev2021; 3: CD013667.
222. Bo S, Sharp C, Beck E et al. First empirical
evaluation of outcomes for mentalization-
based group therapy for adolescents with
BPD. Personal Disord 2017; 8: 396 –401.
223. Beck E, Bo S, Jorgensen MS et al.
Mentalization-based treatment in groups
for adolescents with borderline
personality disorder: a randomized
controlled trial. J Child Psychol Psychiatry
2020; 61: 594 –604.
224. Jørgensen MS, Storebø OJ, Bo S et al.
Mentalization-based treatment in groups
for adolescents with borderline
personality disorder: 3- and 12-month
follow-up of a randomized controlled
trial. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2021;
30: 699 –710.The Supporting Theory of MBT 41
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
h di 00 98088960 4003 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part II
Chapter
3The Mentalization-Based Treatment Model in Practice
What Is Mentalization-Based
Treatment?
Introduction
The appreciation of the difference between your own experience of your mind and
someone ’s else perspective on what they think is going on for you is a key focus of
mentalization-based treatment (MBT) work. The integration of your current experience
of mind with an alternative view —for example, that presented by the clinician in the
course of therapy —is the foundation of a process of change. The capacity to understand
behavior in terms of the associated mental states in self and other —the capacity to
mentalize —is essential for the achievement of this integration of perspectives. Although
most people without major psychological problems are in a relatively strong position to
make productive use of an alternative point of view presented by a therapist, those
individuals who make ineffective use of their own and others ’understanding of mind are
unlikely to benefit from traditional (particularly insight-oriented) psychological therap-
ies. In Chapter 2 we reviewed evidence that individuals with borderline personality
disorder (BPD) appear to have an impoverished model of their own and others ’minds.
However, our understanding of ineffective mentalizing in these individuals is not that
there is a permanent deficit, but rather that, in some individuals, genetic risk combined
with unsupportive early experiences, including neglect and trauma, may create vulner-
ability to a loss of mentalizing in conditions of high emotion, especially those associ-
ated with interpersonal interactions and atta chment activation. Individuals with this
vulnerability then exhibit schematic, ri gid, and sometimes extreme ideas about their
own and others ’states of mind, which make them vu lnerable to powerful emotional
storms and apparently impulsive actions, and can create profound problems in behav-
ioral regulation, including affect re gulation. The weaker an individual ’s sense of their
own subjectivity, the more difficult it is for them to compare the validity of their own
perceptions of the way their mind works with that presented by a “mind expert ”—that
is, a therapist or other clinician. When they are presented with a coherent and most
likely accurate view of mental function in the course of psychotherapy, they are unable
to compare the picture offered to them with their own self-generated model; this
means that all too often they either accept the therapist ’s alternative perspectives
uncritically, or reject them out of hand. All of this implies that “everyday ”psycho-
logical interventions, whether psychodynamic or cognitive, need to be modified in
order to be helpful for patients with BPD. Recognizing this need was, and remains,
central to our thinking behind the development and delivery of MBT, which is
summarized in the rest of this chapter. More detail about the model can be found in
earlier publications [ 1,2].
43
blihd li b C bid  i i 
The primary objective of MBT is recovery of the capacity to mentalize in the
context of attachment relationships. Patie nts with BPD are sensitive in interpersonal
contexts, and particularly vulnerable to deterioration of mental-state awareness in
relationships when their poorly organized attachment system is stimulated —as attach-
ment is triggered, mentalizing becomes vulne rable. Combine that with psychotherapy,
which is inherently relational, and there is a potentially toxic mix. Consequently,
MBT is defined by a constellation of interventions that promote mentalizing, and
active avoidance of interventions that mig ht cause harm by undermining mentalizing.
The MBT clinician negotiates a potentially stormy passage, balancing attachment
stimulation and relational exploration wit h supporting mentalizing strength. If these
two aspects are not balanced so that they work together rather than against each other,
patients with BPD will struggle to develop the capacity to function effectively
in interpersonal relationships —the lack of which is at the core of their difficulties.
Treatment can be effective only if it is able to enhance the patient ’s mentalizing
capacities without generating too many nega tive (iatrogenic) effects by emotionally
overstimulating their attachment system.
Managing the level of arousal in the consulting room is the clinician ’s responsibility.
The patient –clinician relationship needs careful attention if a positive therapeutic
alliance is to develop without encouraging overdependence or ambivalent attachment.
As a guide, interventions that focus on more complex aspects of the relationship —a
necessity if the detail and understanding of mind states are to be explored —should be
used only when the patient ’s attachment system is not overstimulated. If things start to
go wrong —for example, if the patient becomes increasingly aroused and disturbed —the
clinician should retrace the interaction, openly asking if they, the clinician, have
been responsible for making an error or whether there is some other cause of the
problem that has arisen. Offering alternativ e perspectives is crucial, but allowing the
patient to reject them is equally important, while at the same time ensuring that all
perspectives are explored before any are d iscounted. The clinician who feels able to
reconsider their own perspectives —their mind having been changed by the patient ’s
mind —will foster mentalizing.
To summarize the psychotherapy paradox in MBT, any treatment for BPD needs to
stimulate attachment to the clinician while asking the patient to reflect on, evaluate the
accuracy of, and potentially modify beliefs concerning their own mind states and those of
others. Effective treatment entails balancing these components against a background of
gradually increasing complexity without inducing serious side effects. To do this, the
MBT clinician needs to follow a series of principles.
MBT as a Principle-Driven Intervention
In any treatment, there is intrinsic value in the clinician ’s powerful commitment
to the patient ’s subjectivity. At the core of the clinical practice of MBT is a consistent
focus on the patient ’s subjective reality, and a consistent effort by the clinician
to convey that they are working to grasp the world from the patient ’s perspective.
To maintain this focus, clinicians implement MBT by following a series of
principles within a structured intervention process. These principles are summarized
inBox 3.1 .44 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Manage Anxiety
The first principle that MBT clinicians follow in treatment is to maintain anxiety within
a range that encourages rather than inhibits or unbalances any of the dimensions of
mentalizing. Mentalizing and anxiety interact, and there is a particularly strong inter-
relationship between attachment anxiety and the quality of mentalizing. Mentalizing
improves initially with increasing anxiety, until a tipping point is reached beyond which
the chance of effective mentalizing decreases rapidly, leaving anxiety untethered and
likely to trigger a fight-or-flight response. Patients with BPD can reach this tipping point
particularly quickly and in a wide range of circumstances, albeit primarily in circum-
stances that present interpersonal and social challenges. Escalating anxiety in sessions,
whatever the reason for it, is treated with great care to ensure that the patient ’s
mentalizing is supported rather than undermined. The converse situation —that of
insufficient anxiety —is also a danger for the clinician, as the patient ’s attachment/
mentalizing system will not be productively stimulated, leading to the disengaged patient
failing to learn how to manage feelings, maintain mentalizing in relationships, and bring
about change. Some patients, such as those with more antisocial characteristics, down-
regulate or deactivate attachment anxiety to maintain their mentalizing, but at consider-
able cost to others and themselves. For these individuals, mentalizing becomes restricted,
for example, by the excessive use of cognitive mentalizing and limited activation of
affective mentalizing. Cognitive rigidity ensues, generating the cold, calm appearance of
the person with antisocial personality disorder and psychopathic traits (see Chapter 7 ),
who uses excessive cognitive mentalizing that is not balanced by either access to self-
affective states or the subjective experience of others, which might have enabled them toBox 3.1 Principles of MBT.
Emotions and Mentalizing
/C15Manage anxiety and titrate attachment anxiety.
/C15Balance mentalizing: follow affective mentalizing if mentalizing is stable, otherwise use
contrary moves.
/C15Αctivate relational process: work with deactivation and hyperactivation of mental/
attachment systems.
Responsiveness of Clinician
/C15Roll with the patient ’s and your own reactivity and reaction.
/C15Empathic validation is the initial intervention: a contingent and marked response to
the patient ’s mental state is recommended as the first step in sessions.
/C15Move from a dominant theme to a subdominant affective theme (often relational
interaction).
Mentalizing Focus: Do ’s and Don ’ts
/C15Do monitor current mentalizing —process versus content.
/C15Don’t join in with low mentalizing —for example, don ’t respond to the patient as if they
are mentalizing by elaborating content currently processed in low mentalizing, but
reinstate mentalizing first.
/C15Don’t take over the patient ’s mentalizing —for example, don ’t meet their low
mentalizing with your high mentalizing, or mentalize their low mentalizing.
/C15Don’t assume that the patient ’s mind works like your mind.What Is MBT? 45
blihd li b C bid  i i 
empathize emotionally with them. For mentalizing to flourish in social and personal
interactions, attachment and anxiety are both necessary, but need to be kept within a
manageable range —not too much and not too little.
Balance Mentalizing
The second principle is to focus on the balance of the poles of mentalizing across all of
its dimensions so as to maintain flexibility and adaptability. In clinical interactions this is
done through the use of contrary moves , which trigger the patient ’s mind states back and
forth between the poles of the four dimensions of automatic/controlled, self/other,
cognitive/affective, and internal/external mentalizing (see Chapter 2 ), particularly in
the context of attachment anxiety. Patients with personality disorders appear to over-
and underuse some of the poles in a way that is often characteristic of their particular
disorder. For example, patients with BPD, when anxious, show difficulty in separating
experiences of self and other, so the task is to help them to develop a separateness and
distinction between what they feel themselves to be and how they experience themselves
as seen by others. In contrast, patients with narcissistic personality disorder may over-
inflate their self-experience and derogate the experiences of others. So with these
individuals the task is to use contrary moves to rekindle the underused pole of regard
for others, or to puncture gently (with careful concurrent empathic validation) the
inflated interest in the self-valuation pole.
Activate Relational Process
The third principle is to develop mentalizing of self and other into more complex
conversations about what is happening within the therapeutic relationship. This begins
with ensuring that the mentalizing of both self and other experience is activated. The
mental states and affective experiences of both patient and clinician need to be differenti-
ated and, when possible, processed together in the we-mode. This can be accomplished by
moving from a dominant theme within the session, say the more conscious content, to a
subdominant theme, say that of an underlying dynamic process between patient and
clinician, such as both the clinician and the patient “treading on eggshells ”as the content
is being discussed, for fear of triggering too strong an emotional reaction in either or both
of them (see the discussion of affect focus, later in this chapter). We-ness, or the “we-
mode, ”is a perspective that transcends what occurs within the separate selves of “you”and
“me”to represent what is occurring for the relational unit of “us”(seeChapter 2 ). Higher
levels of relational mentalizing go beyond individuality. Effective social collaboration is
partly dependent on groups of individuals seeing their actions as being directed in pursuit
o fas h a r e dg o a l( i . e . ,a sa “we”). When individuals share their minds in a collective mode of
cognition, they create a “joint mind. ”So, in the clinical interaction, we-ness is distinct from
either the patient ’s or the clinician ’s individual perspectives on self and other. As an
inherently relational representation, it is a state which is actively developed and promoted
in MBT in a number of ways that follow a path to relational work, including:
1. joint formulation and a collaborative stance
2. personal mentalizing profile
3. working explicitly not only with the mind states of the patient but also with those of
the clinician
4. prioritizing empathic validation46 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
blihd li b C bid  i i 
5. focus on the alliance, its ruptures, and joint intentionality
6. encouragement of self-disclosure in relation to the clinician ’s own
interpersonal strategies.
The MBT clinician openly presents their thoughts and feelings and their counter-
relational responses to the patient, clarifying that neither person in the therapeutic
interaction has a monopoly on valid views of reality, and that both must accept that
each side experiences interpersonal interactions only impressionistically. As a part of
relational mentalizing, the patient is asked to mentalize the clinician just as the clinician
is required to mentalize the patient. A sense of we-ness emerges as the clinician and
patient engage in the shared task of mentalizing both self and other, but it is recognized
as a momentary state of awareness of mutual understanding, which is nevertheless
critical in determining the value and quality of the communication between them. In
MBT groups (see Chapter 5 ), a sense of we-ness is additionally generated as the
participants define the values of “our”group at the outset, and then revisit and reformu-
late the group project around those values at regular intervals.
Process Versus Content
The fourth principle is for clinicians to be careful not to over-elaborate poorly mentalized
content or reinforce ineffective mentalizing processes. The easiest way for the clinician
to think about differentiating process and content is by considering the “how”versus the
“what ”and “why”of thoughts and feelings. How a thought or feeling is processed first
needs to be taken into account. Taking unmentalized content at face value will not engage
the patient ’s mentalizing and stimulate their curiosity. In addition, it is all too easy to start
persuading a patient, for example, that their self-criticism is incorrect or lacking in
evidence, or to argue with their subjective experience of rejection by pointing out their
social sensitivity. Interventions that either confirm or oppose the patient ’s unmentalized
content join with them in a non-mentalizing process by validating it as a pure reality or by
arguing with it, leaving the patient feeling misunderstood. The overarching aim is to
change “how”the experience is processed and to restore effective mentalizing. The MBT
clinician therefore steers a middle course between confirming and debating content until
effective empathic validation of some aspect of the content can be delivered. Only then
can a mentalizing process be triggered. At this point, “what ”the experience is about can
be explored and then given credible meaning to the individual —this is the “why. ”
Empathic Validation of the Impact of Experience
The move from content (in low-mentalizing mode) to a focus on process follows the fifth
principle, which is that the clinician initially intervenes using contingent and marked
responses of empathic emotional validation [3]. Humans are sensitive to the existence of
contingencies between their behavior and environmental events, and are equally sensitive
to their own mental-state intention and the mental response from others. We contend
that contingency detection, as an aspect of interpersonal interaction, is crucially involved
in progressively developing the awareness of affective states through identifying one ’s
own reaction in the contingent response of the other. More specifically, the clinician ’s
contingent reflections of the patient ’s expressive displays while struggling to mentalize
play a central causal role in the development of emotional self-awareness and control in
the patient; this is a central aspect of mentalizing, but it requires scaffolding and support
in people with personality disorders. Importantly, empathic validation of the patient byWhat Is MBT? 47
blihd li b C bid  i i 
the clinician does not require the clinician to agree with what the patient is saying (as we
have outlined earlier); rather, it means showing awareness of the impact that the
thoughts and feelings may have on the subjective state of the person they are working
with. So the clinician operates within a framework of empathic validation of the patient ’s
experience as the foundation for all other interventions. The facilitation of a sense of we-
ness is organized around first seeing things jointly from the patient ’s perspective.
Focus on the Mentalizing Process: How Mental States
are Processed
The clinician needs to ensure that the therapeutic process remains a joint creation by
patient and clinician. At the same time, it is essential that the clinician:
1. recognizes ineffective, low-level mentalizing
2. does not take over mentalizing for the patient
3. does not try to mentalize non-mentalizing discourse
4. does not engage in vacuous superficial mentalizing.
None of these edicts is easy to follow —all too often clinicians are “tricked ”by their
inborn reactions into thinking that pretend mode (see Chapter 2 ) reflects psychological
insight when in fact it is a subtle form of hypermentalizing, in which one ’s own and/or
others ’motives and mental states are described in elaborate detail, but with little or no
grounding in reality. Clinicians also have robust mentalizing capacities and are well
trained in psychological understanding, making it easy and tempting for them to take
over a patient ’s struggle to explore problems by suggesting constructive solutions to their
concerns; it is natural to support and to offer help and provide alternative perspectives
and solutions for the patient ’s challenges. But once the clinician starts down these paths,
although their own mentalizing processes may be ably demonstrated, the patient ’s
capacities —their “mentalizing muscles ”—will not be strengthened without the exercise
that they need. Therefore the clinician needs to desist from doing the mentalizing for the
patient, and instead work consistently to trigger the patient ’s mentalizing and then help
them to maintain it.
Democracy, Equity, and Collaboration
The patient and clinician decide what to work on together, they are equal partners in the
work, and they collaborate to build increasingly salient personal narratives and under-
standings. Openness to different perspectives is at the heart of mentalizing, along with
humility and being ordinarily human and without arrogance. In terms of mental states,
the patient and clinician are equal —neither person has a more valid experience of
interactions and their associated mental processes than the other, and both have the
capacity to misinterpret experiences. Understanding mental states should be a joint and
collaborative process. If patients perceive themselves as “inferior ”or lower in a hierarchy,
this will inhibit their capacity to think for themselves and predispose them to simply
accept the clinician ’s formulations. Power asymmetry is antithetical to thinking genu-
inely jointly and collaboratively, and to learning about oneself from and through others.
To learn from the clinician in a manner that enables personal change, the patient has to
feel that the clinician ’s mind is approachable, accessible, and agreeable. At a dynamic
level, equality of mind states and the requirement to consider each other ’s mind state is a48 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
blihd li b C bid  i i 
two-way process. The clinician is necessarily focused on the mind of the patient, and the
patient needs to be equally interested in the mind of the clinician ( “Why does the clinician
say that? ”;“Where does he get that idea from? ”;“What does it mean about me? ”). For
the patient to be able to do this, epistemic trust has to be created, which will take time.
So, inevitably, the direction of flow of mental-state interest is often one-way at the start
of treatment, with the patient being rightly concerned about their own mind states. But it
is important to remember that the directional imbalance can be in both directions, with
the patient being overly concerned about the mind of the clinician or, at times, the
clinician being preoccupied with themselves for personal or other reasons. Even in these
situations the subjective experiences of both parties have equal merit and require equally
serious scrutiny.
A word about democracy —or, perhaps better, equity. We have already considered the
importance of power differentials in the ordinary therapeutic setting, and explained that
feeling like the weaker (i.e., help-seeking) person in an interpersonal dialogue is destruc-
tive to mentalizing, probably because a sense of inferiority is almost inevitably accom-
panied by shame, which leads to withdrawal. Openness and a willingness on the part of
the clinician to disclose some of their mentalizing processes is part of appropriate
“levelling up ”of the patient, through the clinician accounting for, and being accountable
for, their own thoughts and feelings. Another aspect of “democratization ”in MBT is
when the clinician thinks of the person coming to see them as a conversational partner
rather than a patient or a client (as these labels carry a tone of supplication). Important in
this regard is the clinician ’s declaration of their own vulnerability to ineffective mentaliz-
ing and their open acceptance of it when it happens in sessions —which it inevitably will.
The MBT clinician explicitly shares their mind states with the patient when this is
relevant to the process of treatment, just as th e patient does. This allows the interactional
aspects of subjective experience to be considered. Sharing becomes particularly important
when the interaction between the patient and clinician interferes with the work of therapy,
or when the clinician loses their own cap acity for mentalizing. The patient may —often
unwittingly —be intimidating or touch on latent fears in the clinician, inducing anxiety in
the clinician, who then cannot think clearly. I ti si m p o r t a n tt h a tt h ep a t i e n ti sm a d ea w a r e
of any interference in the clinician ’s ability to think, as this will not only prevent the delivery
of effective help, but may also confuse the pa tient who is suddenly facing an ineffective
clinician. Sharing the interactional experience from the clinician ’s point of view allows
the patient to consider the effects they may have on others, as well as enabling the clinician
to stabilize their own mind through the activation of better mentalizing by putting their
thoughts and feelings into words. At other times, the clinician ’s mind may go blank, or
they may be uncertain how to respond to th e patient; this is a common reaction to
ineffective mentalizing by the patient. In th ese situations, the MBT clinician should not
worry, but should simply share their state of mind: “You know, I am not sure what to say
about that. You have stumped me there. Help me think about it. You were saying ....”
The mind of the MBT clinician is therefore ideally a benign “open book ”to be
considered by the patient. We learn about ourselves through others; if others close their
mind to us, we shall learn less. Just to be clear, this should not be seen as permission for
the clinician to talk about their own life problems to the patient! It is a reminder to the
clinician to be open in reaction to their experience of the patient. But note the qualifica-
tion: benign means open, courteous, generous, kind, and sensitive; it does not mean
brutal, critical, haughty, frosty, or uncharitable.What Is MBT? 49
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Authenticity and the “Not-Knowing ”Stance
You don ’t really know about mental states, because they are subjective and can never be
fully knowable. However, you do know about BPD as a heterogeneous set of problems
and psychological processes and other facts and figures that you have learned over the
years. The “not-knowing ”stance is an authentic attitude of curiosity about what is going
on in someone ’s mind —how thoughts and feelings can feel part of us and sometimes be
something that seems alien and imposed on us, almost with a life of their own. They can
be overwhelming. In MBT the focus on mental states is about getting to know them,
taming them, and managing them so that they serve our interactions and
life constructively.
The not-knowing stance comes from an interpersonal perspective. It considers the
reciprocity of mental states and is rooted in the idea that minds can change minds. The
clinician ’s attitude toward their own mind is the same as their attitude toward the
patient ’s mind. They are tentative in the way that they comment on their own construc-
tions, and avoid regarding their own mental states as privileged. The not-knowing stance
includes mental playfulness, and uses imagination and humor to facilitate the joint
project of understanding the complexity of minds. Thoughts and feelings are serious
because they can change the world (they generate action), but they are also transitory,
which gives them a provisional quality of flexibility and transformation. Above all, the
not-knowing stance is the most effective avenue for exploring problems hand in hand, or
better still mind in mind, so that no one has to go into the dark and dangerous places of
their mind alone. When done skilfully, it promotes the we-mode of shared intentionality.
On the other hand, when the not-knowing stance is used clumsily it can seem to a
patient like being inundated with questions —an interrogation —rather than talking with
someone who is present as a conversational partner. This can happen if the clinician
defaults to consistently asking “why”questions. Patients, like most of us, do not know
“why”most of the time, so these are usually pointless questions. We know that “why”
questions demand the activation of the mentalizing network, whereas “how”questions
do not. So if the patient ’s mentalizing is less than optimal, “why”questions are likely to
be pointless in any case. If you find yourself falling into an interrogatory trap, think
about how you would talk to a friend with the same problem. You would not ask “why”
they are feeling sad, “why”they think their child is being difficult, or “why”their partner
has decided to leave them. You would ask them to elaborate on what has happened and
what they thought and felt about it. You are more likely to talk with some astonishment
and genuine curiosity about what happened and what it has been like for them. This will
get you back to a not-knowing stance.
Thus the MBT clinician differentiates between taking a fact-finding stance, a Socratic
questioning (open but focused cognitively) stance, and an exploratory, not-knowing
stance. All three methods of questioning might be used in any session, but once explor-
ation is required the not-knowing attitude needs to be in the forefront of the dialogue,
with interactive discussion, in order to establish trust.
Concluding Remarks
This chapter has outlined the principles that an MBT clinician follows in their clinical
interactions with patients. The clinician uses these principles to underpin all other MBT
interventions so as to maximize their effectiveness. To this extent, when followed, the50 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
blihd li b C bid  i i 
principles create an interactional process in which mentalizing between the patient and
the clinician can flourish. Only then can robust mentalizing in the patient —the primary
aim of MBT —be established. The form of clinical problems during treatment is specific
to the individual patient, so having clear principles to follow allows the clinician to
maintain their own mentalizing in the face of uncertainty. This is especially important in
the treatment of patients with severe metacognitive disorganization, such as those with
BPD (see Chapters 4 and5), who can all too easily create metacognitive disorganization
in the clinician. When the clinician is in doubt, they should model regaining their own
mentalizing ( “I need a moment to get my mind back; I am not sure what I think here. Can
we wait a minute? ”), return to the formulation agreed with the patient (described in
Chapter 4 ), use an empathically validating stance, and restart the exploration of prob-
lems with a clear focus on the mentalizing process.
References
1. Bateman A, Fonagy P. Mentalization-
Based Treatment for Personality
Disorders: A Practical Guide . Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2016.
2. Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds. Handbook of
Mentalizing in Mental Health Practice ,2nd ed. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association Publishing,
2019.
3. Gergely G, Watson JS. The social
biofeedback theory of parental affect-
mirroring: the development of emotional
self-awareness and self-control in infancy.
Int J Psychoanal 1996; 77: 1181 –212.What Is MBT? 51
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part II
Chapter
3The Mentalization-Based Treatment Model in Practice
What Is Mentalization-Based
Treatment?
Introduction
The appreciation of the difference between your own experience of your mind and
someone ’s else perspective on what they think is going on for you is a key focus of
mentalization-based treatment (MBT) work. The integration of your current experience
of mind with an alternative view —for example, that presented by the clinician in the
course of therapy —is the foundation of a process of change. The capacity to understand
behavior in terms of the associated mental states in self and other —the capacity to
mentalize —is essential for the achievement of this integration of perspectives. Although
most people without major psychological problems are in a relatively strong position to
make productive use of an alternative point of view presented by a therapist, those
individuals who make ineffective use of their own and others ’understanding of mind are
unlikely to benefit from traditional (particularly insight-oriented) psychological therap-
ies. In Chapter 2 we reviewed evidence that individuals with borderline personality
disorder (BPD) appear to have an impoverished model of their own and others ’minds.
However, our understanding of ineffective mentalizing in these individuals is not that
there is a permanent deficit, but rather that, in some individuals, genetic risk combined
with unsupportive early experiences, including neglect and trauma, may create vulner-
ability to a loss of mentalizing in conditions of high emotion, especially those associ-
ated with interpersonal interactions and atta chment activation. Individuals with this
vulnerability then exhibit schematic, ri gid, and sometimes extreme ideas about their
own and others ’states of mind, which make them vu lnerable to powerful emotional
storms and apparently impulsive actions, and can create profound problems in behav-
ioral regulation, including affect re gulation. The weaker an individual ’s sense of their
own subjectivity, the more difficult it is for them to compare the validity of their own
perceptions of the way their mind works with that presented by a “mind expert ”—that
is, a therapist or other clinician. When they are presented with a coherent and most
likely accurate view of mental function in the course of psychotherapy, they are unable
to compare the picture offered to them with their own self-generated model; this
means that all too often they either accept the therapist ’s alternative perspectives
uncritically, or reject them out of hand. All of this implies that “everyday ”psycho-
logical interventions, whether psychodynamic or cognitive, need to be modified in
order to be helpful for patients with BPD. Recognizing this need was, and remains,
central to our thinking behind the development and delivery of MBT, which is
summarized in the rest of this chapter. More detail about the model can be found in
earlier publications [ 1,2].
43
h di 00 98088960 4004 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The primary objective of MBT is recovery of the capacity to mentalize in the
context of attachment relationships. Patie nts with BPD are sensitive in interpersonal
contexts, and particularly vulnerable to deterioration of mental-state awareness in
relationships when their poorly organized attachment system is stimulated —as attach-
ment is triggered, mentalizing becomes vulne rable. Combine that with psychotherapy,
which is inherently relational, and there is a potentially toxic mix. Consequently,
MBT is defined by a constellation of interventions that promote mentalizing, and
active avoidance of interventions that mig ht cause harm by undermining mentalizing.
The MBT clinician negotiates a potentially stormy passage, balancing attachment
stimulation and relational exploration wit h supporting mentalizing strength. If these
two aspects are not balanced so that they work together rather than against each other,
patients with BPD will struggle to develop the capacity to function effectively
in interpersonal relationships —the lack of which is at the core of their difficulties.
Treatment can be effective only if it is able to enhance the patient ’s mentalizing
capacities without generating too many nega tive (iatrogenic) effects by emotionally
overstimulating their attachment system.
Managing the level of arousal in the consulting room is the clinician ’s responsibility.
The patient –clinician relationship needs careful attention if a positive therapeutic
alliance is to develop without encouraging overdependence or ambivalent attachment.
As a guide, interventions that focus on more complex aspects of the relationship —a
necessity if the detail and understanding of mind states are to be explored —should be
used only when the patient ’s attachment system is not overstimulated. If things start to
go wrong —for example, if the patient becomes increasingly aroused and disturbed —the
clinician should retrace the interaction, openly asking if they, the clinician, have
been responsible for making an error or whether there is some other cause of the
problem that has arisen. Offering alternativ e perspectives is crucial, but allowing the
patient to reject them is equally important, while at the same time ensuring that all
perspectives are explored before any are d iscounted. The clinician who feels able to
reconsider their own perspectives —their mind having been changed by the patient ’s
mind —will foster mentalizing.
To summarize the psychotherapy paradox in MBT, any treatment for BPD needs to
stimulate attachment to the clinician while asking the patient to reflect on, evaluate the
accuracy of, and potentially modify beliefs concerning their own mind states and those of
others. Effective treatment entails balancing these components against a background of
gradually increasing complexity without inducing serious side effects. To do this, the
MBT clinician needs to follow a series of principles.
MBT as a Principle-Driven Intervention
In any treatment, there is intrinsic value in the clinician ’s powerful commitment
to the patient ’s subjectivity. At the core of the clinical practice of MBT is a consistent
focus on the patient ’s subjective reality, and a consistent effort by the clinician
to convey that they are working to grasp the world from the patient ’s perspective.
To maintain this focus, clinicians implement MBT by following a series of
principles within a structured intervention process. These principles are summarized
inBox 3.1 .44 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4004 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Manage Anxiety
The first principle that MBT clinicians follow in treatment is to maintain anxiety within
a range that encourages rather than inhibits or unbalances any of the dimensions of
mentalizing. Mentalizing and anxiety interact, and there is a particularly strong inter-
relationship between attachment anxiety and the quality of mentalizing. Mentalizing
improves initially with increasing anxiety, until a tipping point is reached beyond which
the chance of effective mentalizing decreases rapidly, leaving anxiety untethered and
likely to trigger a fight-or-flight response. Patients with BPD can reach this tipping point
particularly quickly and in a wide range of circumstances, albeit primarily in circum-
stances that present interpersonal and social challenges. Escalating anxiety in sessions,
whatever the reason for it, is treated with great care to ensure that the patient ’s
mentalizing is supported rather than undermined. The converse situation —that of
insufficient anxiety —is also a danger for the clinician, as the patient ’s attachment/
mentalizing system will not be productively stimulated, leading to the disengaged patient
failing to learn how to manage feelings, maintain mentalizing in relationships, and bring
about change. Some patients, such as those with more antisocial characteristics, down-
regulate or deactivate attachment anxiety to maintain their mentalizing, but at consider-
able cost to others and themselves. For these individuals, mentalizing becomes restricted,
for example, by the excessive use of cognitive mentalizing and limited activation of
affective mentalizing. Cognitive rigidity ensues, generating the cold, calm appearance of
the person with antisocial personality disorder and psychopathic traits (see Chapter 7 ),
who uses excessive cognitive mentalizing that is not balanced by either access to self-
affective states or the subjective experience of others, which might have enabled them toBox 3.1 Principles of MBT.
Emotions and Mentalizing
/C15Manage anxiety and titrate attachment anxiety.
/C15Balance mentalizing: follow affective mentalizing if mentalizing is stable, otherwise use
contrary moves.
/C15Αctivate relational process: work with deactivation and hyperactivation of mental/
attachment systems.
Responsiveness of Clinician
/C15Roll with the patient ’s and your own reactivity and reaction.
/C15Empathic validation is the initial intervention: a contingent and marked response to
the patient ’s mental state is recommended as the first step in sessions.
/C15Move from a dominant theme to a subdominant affective theme (often relational
interaction).
Mentalizing Focus: Do ’s and Don ’ts
/C15Do monitor current mentalizing —process versus content.
/C15Don’t join in with low mentalizing —for example, don ’t respond to the patient as if they
are mentalizing by elaborating content currently processed in low mentalizing, but
reinstate mentalizing first.
/C15Don’t take over the patient ’s mentalizing —for example, don ’t meet their low
mentalizing with your high mentalizing, or mentalize their low mentalizing.
/C15Don’t assume that the patient ’s mind works like your mind.What Is MBT? 45
h di 00 98088960 4004 blihd li b C bid  i i 
empathize emotionally with them. For mentalizing to flourish in social and personal
interactions, attachment and anxiety are both necessary, but need to be kept within a
manageable range —not too much and not too little.
Balance Mentalizing
The second principle is to focus on the balance of the poles of mentalizing across all of
its dimensions so as to maintain flexibility and adaptability. In clinical interactions this is
done through the use of contrary moves , which trigger the patient ’s mind states back and
forth between the poles of the four dimensions of automatic/controlled, self/other,
cognitive/affective, and internal/external mentalizing (see Chapter 2 ), particularly in
the context of attachment anxiety. Patients with personality disorders appear to over-
and underuse some of the poles in a way that is often characteristic of their particular
disorder. For example, patients with BPD, when anxious, show difficulty in separating
experiences of self and other, so the task is to help them to develop a separateness and
distinction between what they feel themselves to be and how they experience themselves
as seen by others. In contrast, patients with narcissistic personality disorder may over-
inflate their self-experience and derogate the experiences of others. So with these
individuals the task is to use contrary moves to rekindle the underused pole of regard
for others, or to puncture gently (with careful concurrent empathic validation) the
inflated interest in the self-valuation pole.
Activate Relational Process
The third principle is to develop mentalizing of self and other into more complex
conversations about what is happening within the therapeutic relationship. This begins
with ensuring that the mentalizing of both self and other experience is activated. The
mental states and affective experiences of both patient and clinician need to be differenti-
ated and, when possible, processed together in the we-mode. This can be accomplished by
moving from a dominant theme within the session, say the more conscious content, to a
subdominant theme, say that of an underlying dynamic process between patient and
clinician, such as both the clinician and the patient “treading on eggshells ”as the content
is being discussed, for fear of triggering too strong an emotional reaction in either or both
of them (see the discussion of affect focus, later in this chapter). We-ness, or the “we-
mode, ”is a perspective that transcends what occurs within the separate selves of “you”and
“me”to represent what is occurring for the relational unit of “us”(seeChapter 2 ). Higher
levels of relational mentalizing go beyond individuality. Effective social collaboration is
partly dependent on groups of individuals seeing their actions as being directed in pursuit
o fas h a r e dg o a l( i . e . ,a sa “we”). When individuals share their minds in a collective mode of
cognition, they create a “joint mind. ”So, in the clinical interaction, we-ness is distinct from
either the patient ’s or the clinician ’s individual perspectives on self and other. As an
inherently relational representation, it is a state which is actively developed and promoted
in MBT in a number of ways that follow a path to relational work, including:
1. joint formulation and a collaborative stance
2. personal mentalizing profile
3. working explicitly not only with the mind states of the patient but also with those of
the clinician
4. prioritizing empathic validation46 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4004 blihd li b C bid  i i 
5. focus on the alliance, its ruptures, and joint intentionality
6. encouragement of self-disclosure in relation to the clinician ’s own
interpersonal strategies.
The MBT clinician openly presents their thoughts and feelings and their counter-
relational responses to the patient, clarifying that neither person in the therapeutic
interaction has a monopoly on valid views of reality, and that both must accept that
each side experiences interpersonal interactions only impressionistically. As a part of
relational mentalizing, the patient is asked to mentalize the clinician just as the clinician
is required to mentalize the patient. A sense of we-ness emerges as the clinician and
patient engage in the shared task of mentalizing both self and other, but it is recognized
as a momentary state of awareness of mutual understanding, which is nevertheless
critical in determining the value and quality of the communication between them. In
MBT groups (see Chapter 5 ), a sense of we-ness is additionally generated as the
participants define the values of “our”group at the outset, and then revisit and reformu-
late the group project around those values at regular intervals.
Process Versus Content
The fourth principle is for clinicians to be careful not to over-elaborate poorly mentalized
content or reinforce ineffective mentalizing processes. The easiest way for the clinician
to think about differentiating process and content is by considering the “how”versus the
“what ”and “why”of thoughts and feelings. How a thought or feeling is processed first
needs to be taken into account. Taking unmentalized content at face value will not engage
the patient ’s mentalizing and stimulate their curiosity. In addition, it is all too easy to start
persuading a patient, for example, that their self-criticism is incorrect or lacking in
evidence, or to argue with their subjective experience of rejection by pointing out their
social sensitivity. Interventions that either confirm or oppose the patient ’s unmentalized
content join with them in a non-mentalizing process by validating it as a pure reality or by
arguing with it, leaving the patient feeling misunderstood. The overarching aim is to
change “how”the experience is processed and to restore effective mentalizing. The MBT
clinician therefore steers a middle course between confirming and debating content until
effective empathic validation of some aspect of the content can be delivered. Only then
can a mentalizing process be triggered. At this point, “what ”the experience is about can
be explored and then given credible meaning to the individual —this is the “why. ”
Empathic Validation of the Impact of Experience
The move from content (in low-mentalizing mode) to a focus on process follows the fifth
principle, which is that the clinician initially intervenes using contingent and marked
responses of empathic emotional validation [3]. Humans are sensitive to the existence of
contingencies between their behavior and environmental events, and are equally sensitive
to their own mental-state intention and the mental response from others. We contend
that contingency detection, as an aspect of interpersonal interaction, is crucially involved
in progressively developing the awareness of affective states through identifying one ’s
own reaction in the contingent response of the other. More specifically, the clinician ’s
contingent reflections of the patient ’s expressive displays while struggling to mentalize
play a central causal role in the development of emotional self-awareness and control in
the patient; this is a central aspect of mentalizing, but it requires scaffolding and support
in people with personality disorders. Importantly, empathic validation of the patient byWhat Is MBT? 47
h di 00 98088960 4004 blihd li b C bid  i i 
the clinician does not require the clinician to agree with what the patient is saying (as we
have outlined earlier); rather, it means showing awareness of the impact that the
thoughts and feelings may have on the subjective state of the person they are working
with. So the clinician operates within a framework of empathic validation of the patient ’s
experience as the foundation for all other interventions. The facilitation of a sense of we-
ness is organized around first seeing things jointly from the patient ’s perspective.
Focus on the Mentalizing Process: How Mental States
are Processed
The clinician needs to ensure that the therapeutic process remains a joint creation by
patient and clinician. At the same time, it is essential that the clinician:
1. recognizes ineffective, low-level mentalizing
2. does not take over mentalizing for the patient
3. does not try to mentalize non-mentalizing discourse
4. does not engage in vacuous superficial mentalizing.
None of these edicts is easy to follow —all too often clinicians are “tricked ”by their
inborn reactions into thinking that pretend mode (see Chapter 2 ) reflects psychological
insight when in fact it is a subtle form of hypermentalizing, in which one ’s own and/or
others ’motives and mental states are described in elaborate detail, but with little or no
grounding in reality. Clinicians also have robust mentalizing capacities and are well
trained in psychological understanding, making it easy and tempting for them to take
over a patient ’s struggle to explore problems by suggesting constructive solutions to their
concerns; it is natural to support and to offer help and provide alternative perspectives
and solutions for the patient ’s challenges. But once the clinician starts down these paths,
although their own mentalizing processes may be ably demonstrated, the patient ’s
capacities —their “mentalizing muscles ”—will not be strengthened without the exercise
that they need. Therefore the clinician needs to desist from doing the mentalizing for the
patient, and instead work consistently to trigger the patient ’s mentalizing and then help
them to maintain it.
Democracy, Equity, and Collaboration
The patient and clinician decide what to work on together, they are equal partners in the
work, and they collaborate to build increasingly salient personal narratives and under-
standings. Openness to different perspectives is at the heart of mentalizing, along with
humility and being ordinarily human and without arrogance. In terms of mental states,
the patient and clinician are equal —neither person has a more valid experience of
interactions and their associated mental processes than the other, and both have the
capacity to misinterpret experiences. Understanding mental states should be a joint and
collaborative process. If patients perceive themselves as “inferior ”or lower in a hierarchy,
this will inhibit their capacity to think for themselves and predispose them to simply
accept the clinician ’s formulations. Power asymmetry is antithetical to thinking genu-
inely jointly and collaboratively, and to learning about oneself from and through others.
To learn from the clinician in a manner that enables personal change, the patient has to
feel that the clinician ’s mind is approachable, accessible, and agreeable. At a dynamic
level, equality of mind states and the requirement to consider each other ’s mind state is a48 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4004 blihd li b C bid  i i 
two-way process. The clinician is necessarily focused on the mind of the patient, and the
patient needs to be equally interested in the mind of the clinician ( “Why does the clinician
say that? ”;“Where does he get that idea from? ”;“What does it mean about me? ”). For
the patient to be able to do this, epistemic trust has to be created, which will take time.
So, inevitably, the direction of flow of mental-state interest is often one-way at the start
of treatment, with the patient being rightly concerned about their own mind states. But it
is important to remember that the directional imbalance can be in both directions, with
the patient being overly concerned about the mind of the clinician or, at times, the
clinician being preoccupied with themselves for personal or other reasons. Even in these
situations the subjective experiences of both parties have equal merit and require equally
serious scrutiny.
A word about democracy —or, perhaps better, equity. We have already considered the
importance of power differentials in the ordinary therapeutic setting, and explained that
feeling like the weaker (i.e., help-seeking) person in an interpersonal dialogue is destruc-
tive to mentalizing, probably because a sense of inferiority is almost inevitably accom-
panied by shame, which leads to withdrawal. Openness and a willingness on the part of
the clinician to disclose some of their mentalizing processes is part of appropriate
“levelling up ”of the patient, through the clinician accounting for, and being accountable
for, their own thoughts and feelings. Another aspect of “democratization ”in MBT is
when the clinician thinks of the person coming to see them as a conversational partner
rather than a patient or a client (as these labels carry a tone of supplication). Important in
this regard is the clinician ’s declaration of their own vulnerability to ineffective mentaliz-
ing and their open acceptance of it when it happens in sessions —which it inevitably will.
The MBT clinician explicitly shares their mind states with the patient when this is
relevant to the process of treatment, just as th e patient does. This allows the interactional
aspects of subjective experience to be considered. Sharing becomes particularly important
when the interaction between the patient and clinician interferes with the work of therapy,
or when the clinician loses their own cap acity for mentalizing. The patient may —often
unwittingly —be intimidating or touch on latent fears in the clinician, inducing anxiety in
the clinician, who then cannot think clearly. I ti si m p o r t a n tt h a tt h ep a t i e n ti sm a d ea w a r e
of any interference in the clinician ’s ability to think, as this will not only prevent the delivery
of effective help, but may also confuse the pa tient who is suddenly facing an ineffective
clinician. Sharing the interactional experience from the clinician ’s point of view allows
the patient to consider the effects they may have on others, as well as enabling the clinician
to stabilize their own mind through the activation of better mentalizing by putting their
thoughts and feelings into words. At other times, the clinician ’s mind may go blank, or
they may be uncertain how to respond to th e patient; this is a common reaction to
ineffective mentalizing by the patient. In th ese situations, the MBT clinician should not
worry, but should simply share their state of mind: “You know, I am not sure what to say
about that. You have stumped me there. Help me think about it. You were saying ....”
The mind of the MBT clinician is therefore ideally a benign “open book ”to be
considered by the patient. We learn about ourselves through others; if others close their
mind to us, we shall learn less. Just to be clear, this should not be seen as permission for
the clinician to talk about their own life problems to the patient! It is a reminder to the
clinician to be open in reaction to their experience of the patient. But note the qualifica-
tion: benign means open, courteous, generous, kind, and sensitive; it does not mean
brutal, critical, haughty, frosty, or uncharitable.What Is MBT? 49
h di 00 98088960 4004 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Authenticity and the “Not-Knowing ”Stance
You don ’t really know about mental states, because they are subjective and can never be
fully knowable. However, you do know about BPD as a heterogeneous set of problems
and psychological processes and other facts and figures that you have learned over the
years. The “not-knowing ”stance is an authentic attitude of curiosity about what is going
on in someone ’s mind —how thoughts and feelings can feel part of us and sometimes be
something that seems alien and imposed on us, almost with a life of their own. They can
be overwhelming. In MBT the focus on mental states is about getting to know them,
taming them, and managing them so that they serve our interactions and
life constructively.
The not-knowing stance comes from an interpersonal perspective. It considers the
reciprocity of mental states and is rooted in the idea that minds can change minds. The
clinician ’s attitude toward their own mind is the same as their attitude toward the
patient ’s mind. They are tentative in the way that they comment on their own construc-
tions, and avoid regarding their own mental states as privileged. The not-knowing stance
includes mental playfulness, and uses imagination and humor to facilitate the joint
project of understanding the complexity of minds. Thoughts and feelings are serious
because they can change the world (they generate action), but they are also transitory,
which gives them a provisional quality of flexibility and transformation. Above all, the
not-knowing stance is the most effective avenue for exploring problems hand in hand, or
better still mind in mind, so that no one has to go into the dark and dangerous places of
their mind alone. When done skilfully, it promotes the we-mode of shared intentionality.
On the other hand, when the not-knowing stance is used clumsily it can seem to a
patient like being inundated with questions —an interrogation —rather than talking with
someone who is present as a conversational partner. This can happen if the clinician
defaults to consistently asking “why”questions. Patients, like most of us, do not know
“why”most of the time, so these are usually pointless questions. We know that “why”
questions demand the activation of the mentalizing network, whereas “how”questions
do not. So if the patient ’s mentalizing is less than optimal, “why”questions are likely to
be pointless in any case. If you find yourself falling into an interrogatory trap, think
about how you would talk to a friend with the same problem. You would not ask “why”
they are feeling sad, “why”they think their child is being difficult, or “why”their partner
has decided to leave them. You would ask them to elaborate on what has happened and
what they thought and felt about it. You are more likely to talk with some astonishment
and genuine curiosity about what happened and what it has been like for them. This will
get you back to a not-knowing stance.
Thus the MBT clinician differentiates between taking a fact-finding stance, a Socratic
questioning (open but focused cognitively) stance, and an exploratory, not-knowing
stance. All three methods of questioning might be used in any session, but once explor-
ation is required the not-knowing attitude needs to be in the forefront of the dialogue,
with interactive discussion, in order to establish trust.
Concluding Remarks
This chapter has outlined the principles that an MBT clinician follows in their clinical
interactions with patients. The clinician uses these principles to underpin all other MBT
interventions so as to maximize their effectiveness. To this extent, when followed, the50 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4004 blihd li b C bid  i i 
principles create an interactional process in which mentalizing between the patient and
the clinician can flourish. Only then can robust mentalizing in the patient —the primary
aim of MBT —be established. The form of clinical problems during treatment is specific
to the individual patient, so having clear principles to follow allows the clinician to
maintain their own mentalizing in the face of uncertainty. This is especially important in
the treatment of patients with severe metacognitive disorganization, such as those with
BPD (see Chapters 4 and5), who can all too easily create metacognitive disorganization
in the clinician. When the clinician is in doubt, they should model regaining their own
mentalizing ( “I need a moment to get my mind back; I am not sure what I think here. Can
we wait a minute? ”), return to the formulation agreed with the patient (described in
Chapter 4 ), use an empathically validating stance, and restart the exploration of prob-
lems with a clear focus on the mentalizing process.
References
1. Bateman A, Fonagy P. Mentalization-
Based Treatment for Personality
Disorders: A Practical Guide . Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2016.
2. Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds. Handbook of
Mentalizing in Mental Health Practice ,2nd ed. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association Publishing,
2019.
3. Gergely G, Watson JS. The social
biofeedback theory of parental affect-
mirroring: the development of emotional
self-awareness and self-control in infancy.
Int J Psychoanal 1996; 77: 1181 –212.What Is MBT? 51
h di 00 98088960 4004 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part II
Chapter
4The Mentalization-Based Treatment Model in Practice
The Clinical Process of
Mentalization-Based Treatment
A Step-by-Step Guide
Introduction
A brief summary of mentalization-based treatment (MBT) as a structured and integrated
treatment delivered over time is provided in Box 4.1 . MBT requires a team approach of
combined individual and group psychotherapy offered together over a period of 12 –18
months. MBT groups (MBT-G) are discussed in Chapter 5 . More recently, MBT has also
been offered as either individual therapy or group therapy alone, but at the time of
writing the outcomes from using only a single mode of implementation are unclear, as
there have been no dismantling studies comparing these different modes of delivery.
Box 4.1 Summary of MBT.
MBT is a structured treatment that can be implemented in a range of settings. It integrates
individual and group psychotherapy, targeting suicidality and self-harm, emotional pro-
cessing, and relational instability through a focus on improving the capacity for mentaliz-
ing and improving social learning through the development of increasing epistemic trust.
Treatment usually lasts for 12 –18 months.
Initial Phase
/C15Psychoeducation (MBT-Introductory Group).
/C15Collaboratively developed formulation.
/C15Formation of a treatment alliance based on understanding of the patient ’s specific
long-term attachment processes.
/C15Safety planning.
/C15Identification of mentalizing vulnerabilities, particularly in relation to high-risk
behaviors, and establishing the contexts that trigger ineffective modes of mentalizing.
Treatment PhaseGeneral Strategies
/C15Stabilization of high-risk behaviors.
/C15Supportive, empathic validation to enable mentalizing.
/C15Clarification and elaboration to create a foundation for basic mentalizing that entails
affect identification and contextualization.
/C15Interpersonal focus that enables an exploration of alternative perspectives.
/C15Repairing alliance ruptures.
52
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
As shown in Box 4.1 , MBT can be divided into phases, with each phase being subdivided
into specific clinical tasks. Each phase is underpinned by the patient as a partner , and more
specifically as a conversational partner , who becomes equally expert in understanding their
own mentalizing and using the MBT framework as a structure for understanding their
problems and how to address them. Remember that “knowing about ”mind states is not the
exclusive preserve of the clinician. Different perspectives are equally valid, because our
representations of thoughts and feelings have impressionistic origins and each has to be
given, as far as possible, impartial consideration without prejudgment or prejudice.
Throughout this chapter we shall refer to the case of Sarah, a young woman who has
prototypical features of borderline personality disorder (BPD). The clinical example that
follows is used to illustrate the process of MBT implementation, which consists of five
main clinical components:
1. assessment
2. formulation
3. psychoeducation
4. exploration of identified problems using general and specific strategies to build the
patient ’s mentalizing
5. finishing.
Clinical Example: Information about Sarah
Sarah is 28 years old. She has had problems with drug addiction. She used cocaine and
cannabis for a number of years, but she has now been clear of all drugs for over 6 months.
Her current complaint is that she cannot bear to be alone. She separated from a long-term
partner around 1 year ago. They have a son who is now aged 5, and she has joint custody
of him with her partner. She feels “normal ”when she is looking after her son, but when she
is on her own in her flat she becomes anxious and needs to see people. Consequently, she
goes out frequently because, in her own words, “I am desperate to be with other people .”
There is some indication of relationship problems: her previous partner was controlling
and at times violent. Sarah did not believe that she was in danger and so she continuedBox 4.1 (cont. )
Specific Strategies
/C15Using mentalizing to manage impulsivity.
/C15Building stable mentalizing processes in attachment relationships through activation
of relational constructs in both group and individual therapy; linking learned therapy
experience to daily social and personal life with a focus on social exclusion/inclusion
and personal rejection sensitivity; increasing self and other reflective capacity when
under stress.
/C15Re-establishing mentalizing when ineffective mentalizing is triggered.
/C15Trauma-focused personal narrative work.
Final Phase
/C15Experience of ending treatment for patient and clinician, and review of treatment.
/C15Specific focus on BPD processes (e.g., fears of abandonment).
/C15Generalization of stable mentalizing and learned social understanding.
/C15Mentalizing skills to maintain self-care.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 53
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
the relationship until 1 year ago, when her partner left her. She is now in a relationship
with another man whom she thinks is devoted to her. She recognizes that she causes
problems in this relationship by constantly asking for reassurance. She constantly asks him
if he loves her, and frequently asks about his previous girlfriends and how they compare
to her.
She shows some mood fluctuations, and has in the past engaged in self-harm. She is
not currently at risk in terms of suicidal impulses, but she took an overdose of drugs 2 years
ago, because she wanted to die.
When the clinician first saw Sarah, she presented as someone able to talk about herself
and she seemed a likeable person. She has rapidly shifting mood states, which seem to be
dependent on environmental triggers. She feels good when she is with other people and
bad when she is alone.
Initial Phase
Assessment
A general assessment of psychological resilience and mental health problems is under-
taken for all patients who request psychological treatment. Having established that a
psychotherapeutic approach to the patient ’s problems is the most appropriate method,
an assessment is made of the patient ’s suitability for MBT. This creates a series of clinical
dilemmas for the clinician, as there is limited evidence on which to base a decision to
recommend MBT rather than other evidence-based interventions. There are no estab-
lished patient characteristics (e.g., dependency), BPD features (e.g., the predominance of
interpersonal problems over impulsivity), or psychiatric symptoms (e.g., high levels of
anxiety) which suggest that a patient will specifically benefit from MBT. Furthermore,
there is no evidence to suggest that MBT is actively harmful for some types of patients
and should therefore be avoided. Research trials of MBT, in contrast to trials of other
treatments for BPD, have kept exclusion criteria to a minimum; patients with co-
occurring conditions that might be expected to interfere with good outcomes, such as
antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) and complex post-traumatic stress disorder, have
always been included [ 1]. MBT was more effective than the comparator (standard)
treatment for these patients with co-occurring conditions, so such clinical characteristics
should not be a reason to exclude patients from being offered MBT [ 2,3]. This should not
be taken to mean that these patients ’treatments would have been less effective had their
comorbid conditions been specifically attended to. The limited research evidence avail-
able suggests that MBT may be particularly helpful for patients with more severe
personality disorder, measured as the number of personality disorder diagnoses at the
start of treatment. Patients with more than two personality disorder diagnoses did less
well with the comparator treatment than with MBT [ 2,3].
Clinical consensus suggests that certain patients present difficulties with regard to
treatment. Patients with restrictive eating disorders and low body mass index may
require a focus on diet and eating habits to achieve weight gain, which needs additional
clinical intervention (MBT for patients with eating disorders is discussed in Chapter 12).
Substance abuse disorder, particularly alcohol dependence, interferes substantially with a
patient ’s organizational abilities; these patients may find it difficult to attend sessions
regularly and to reflect meaningfully on their mental processes. Patients with avoidant54 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
personality disorder (discussed in Chapter 8 ) may feel distinctly uncomfortable in MBT
groups for people with emotional dysregulation, which have a primary focus on inter-
personal interaction, emotional regulation, and impulsivity (MBT groups are described
inChapter 5 ); the clinician may wish to consider a more tailored mentalizing interven-
tion for patients who are highly avoidant. However, long-term follow-up studies of MBT
have shown little evidence of poorer outcomes associated with these comorbid
conditions [ 4].
Assessment of Mentalizing Profile
The adaptability and flexibility of the four primary dimensions of mentalizing (which are
described in Chapter 2 ) are assessed in the first phase of MBT, and this assessment forms
a central part of the formulation. In making the assessment, the clinician takes into
account that temporary imbalances and loss of flexibility in mentalizing dimensions
are normative. Controlled or well-regulated mentalizing involves rapid movement
between the poles of each dimension in a self-correcting way, with the poles balancing
each other just as they help the person to balance their position within their social world.
Concern should arise only when mentalizing becomes fixed, rigid, and inflexible, with
one of the poles of any dimension being over- or under-used or regularly applied out
of context.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
Sarah is unable to be alone at home, but can feel comfortable when she is there with her
son. The clinician explores this issue with Sarah, who says that she feels “Yuk”when sitting
at home alone, and becomes restless and feels compelled to go out. Asking her to give
further descriptors of “Yuk”elicits only vague and undifferentiated bodily/mental experi-
ence; despite probing questions, she is unable to describe the feelings or even specific
triggers in detail, or link them to other experiences that may be similar. She gets into a
painful state that she has to try to avoid. All of this suggests that Sarah has difficulties
accessing a differentiated internal psychological (mental) self. Her subjective experience of
herself in terms of her thoughts and feelings is not well anchored in previous experiences
that would give her continuity, coherence, and a differentiated inner experience. Her state
of mind seems “untethered ”and subject to the anxieties associated with the black hole of
emptiness described by so many patients with BPD. The clinician notes “self”experience as
a major problem for Sarah.
Recognizing and understanding feelings of emptiness in people with BPD is hard for
clinicians because it is such an alien state to them, and yet it is essential for the clinician
to be able to identify these feelings and empathize with the existential threat that they
pose to the patient. There is limited information in the literature to guide the clinician,
but Miller et al. have summarized the views of expert clinicians in their description of the
chronic feelings of emptiness, numbness, and disconnection reported by patients with
BPD in interviews [ 5]. Importantly, the expression of emptiness by the patient should
alert the clinician to look for other evidence of risk, as the state of mind is intensely
painful, and suicide may emerge as an apparent solution.
If there is a problem at one pole of a dimension of mentalizing, there will be a
problem at the other pole, usually associated with excessive, inappropriate utilization.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 55
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
As the MBT clinician has noted that Sarah has difficulties with self-experience, he now
explores Sarah ’s ability to represent “others ”—that is, others thinking about her and how
she sees them representing herself. Can she represent others ’mental states as distinct
from her own? She talks about her current partner and how she worries whether he loves
her as much as she loves him, as she “needs to be with him. ”When asked to contrast her
need to be with him and her feeling of love for him and his love for her, she answers “Aren ’t
they all the same thing? ”Gentle probing failed to lead to elaboration. This suggests that
Sarah can find it hard to discriminate between her different feelings when they are intense,
and to use their variability to inform her evaluation and experience of her relationship (at
least with her partner). In addition, exploring her persistent questioning of her boyfriend ’s
love for her suggests that she has a need to be reassured by constant statements or
actions which demonstrate that his love for her is ongoing. This suggests that her ability to
create and access both a stable representation of herself as worthy of affection, and a
picture of a boyfriend loving her, is highly vulnerable to collapse. The MBT clinician makes
a note to focus on this aspect of the self/other mentalizing dimension.
It is helpful to check whether Sarah ’s difficulty with creating stable self/other repre-
sentations is particular to the emotional and loving aspects of her relationships. She may
be able to read her boyfriend ’s mind well in other contexts —for example, when he is
concerned about how he is doing at work. So the clinician needs to explore an example of
the couple interacting constructively and, if appropriate, identify some of Sarah ’s
stronger capacities for reading others ’mental states. This adds positive elements to the
formulation and allows a contrast with the difficulties associated with their relationship
that arise when attachment processes are the most active.
Cognitive/affective processing is assessed next.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
Sarah is temperamentally anxious and her emotions are easily activated in interpersonal
interactions, particularly those that are more intimate. But, again, the clinician notes that
she describes herself as stable and not overly emotional when she is with her son.
However, other situations can lead her to become so anxious that her thoughts become
uncontrolled, and she feels frightened and needs other people to help her to calibrate her
internal states and to stop her from overreacting —“I am lost, I am just feeling so frightened,
it’s horrible, I don ’t know what to do. What do you think I should do? ”This is a natural
response to anxiety, but the problem for Sarah is that her anxiety is not soothed by any
response or, if it is, this is only momentary and she has to seek further reassurance. This
suggests that her cognitive/affective mentalizing poles are out of balance. She struggles to
make use of cognitive mentalizing to help to regulate her emotions effectively. She
experiences considerable confusion (metacognitive disorganization) in the context of high
arousal, and she becomes unable to process emotions through the combination of
emotion-regulation strategies that people generally use: recognition of physical/bodily
experience and assigning the appropriate causal attributions to it; identifying the source of
anxiety, the context, and an appropriate action to take; and tethering the experience to
similar previous experiences. The clinician makes a note of a cognitive/affective imbalance
with domination of affective processing.56 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Next, the clinician considers the patient ’s reliance on automatic and controlled
mentalizing, which can be thought of as “fast”and “slow”thinking. In Chapter 2 we
explained that automatic mentalizing is rapid and serviceable for most types of everyday
interaction. Problems arise when there is overuse of automatic process. Assumptions are
made that are not reflected on, modified, and questioned when expectations based on
them fail to connect with observed reality (e.g., they fail to elicit a desired response); they
may be treated as accurate despite obvious incompatibilities with evidence from observ-
able reality.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
Sarah assumes that others will not like her. She is highly sensitive to rejection and even to
very small slights. She is aware of this but unable to stop herself reacting, and easily
becomes demanding and angry when she feels unwanted. This is very marked with her
partner, but is also notable with others (friends, colleagues, and even people she does not
know well). Sarah relies on automatic mentalizing and shows very limited activation of
controlled mentalizing, with which she could ask herself, for example, “What is it that he is
doing that makes me feel unwanted? What is making me feel rejected at the moment? ”The
MBT clinician makes a note for the formulation. The clinician also notes that when Sarah
tries to reflect, prompted by her friends or partner, her efforts are disappointing in their
outcome. She misreads people and creates implausible personal narratives.
Momentary self-reflection is the hallmark of mentalizing that is well regulated or
controlled. Patients who are stuck at the automatic mentalizing pole sail on with their
assumptions, oblivious of contradiction or challenge, and rarely pause until they hit an
immovable reality (e.g., loss of their job or relationship, a physical attack, or an instance
of immense humiliation). Meanwhile, the caring observer (e.g., a loved one, the clinician,
or another person who is in the role of conversational partner with the patient) becomes
increasingly perplexed, annoyed, deeply concerned, helpless, and frustrated, with an
overwhelming experience of “I want to help but I don ’t know what you are talking
about .”Communication has become disrupted because the patient has ceased to take
their conversational partner ’s mind into consideration —they project into the conversa-
tional partner their own narrative, creating a mismatch. As the discourse progresses over
time, there is a clash between the patient ’s self-experience and their conversational
partner ’s understanding of the patient ’s reality, which is based on the conversational
partner ’s mental model of what they expect the patient ’s mind contains. So there are two
mismatching expectations —the model that the patient is generating of their conversa-
tional partner, and the conversational partner ’s expectation of the patient ’s mind, based
on their shared reality as it seems from their own perspective. The clinician notes that in
the course of intense emotion there is typically a collapse into social confusion.
Finally, the clinician assesses the external/internal mentalizing poles. The use of
external mentalizing without an adequate link to the internal mentalizing process creates
excessive reliance on observable phenomena to understand mental states. This typically
applies to the mental states of others, but can also involve being overly influenced by
external factors when making judgments about internal self-states —that is, the person
relies more on “out there ”than “in here ”to understand what they are experiencing.
Commonly, there is some degree of assumed synchronicity between a person ’s facialThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 57
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
expression, eye movement, body posture, and tone of voice and their internal state of
mind, so we safely assume a continuity between someone ’s words, their bodily expres-
sion, and their underlying mental state. Of course, the reality is that context and the
capacity to reason within it matter more than the expressions themselves. So whenever
we over-rely on external appearance for understanding the mental states of others
without reasoning from the context and reflecting that our impressions may not match
our understanding, which is based on what else we can expect of the conversational
partner ’s internal state, we will be easily misled and jump to inaccurate conclusions. To
give an example from the clinician ’s perspective (as the clinician, like anyone, will use an
external focus and link it to automatic mentalizing), suppose that a patient like Sarah tells
us something with a little hesitancy in their voice, and their eyes flicker as their gaze
moves slightly away. This immediately generates in us a sense of doubt about the truth of
what they are telling us. So we question them further to make sure that we are not
developing an interaction based on a falsehood that would interfere with our relationship
and how we understand the problems being addressed. The likelihood that we are
accurate in this specific situation is to some extent a matter of chance, but this does
not stop us from believing in our intuition, as we have prior experience of similar
interactions. However, on gaining more information, we correct and clarify our
assumptions.
In the case of Sarah, it is obvious that she is not an accomplished liar, and to some
extent she reveals her vulnerabilities to others all too easily. Therefore asking her about
what is behind her apparent discomfort shows us that we were wrong in our assumption
about the content and meaning of her discomfort, and we modify our understanding.
But Sarah is not so flexible and adaptive in her assumptions linked to external
mentalizing. When Sarah relies on external mentalizing, this can trigger automatic,
poorly regulated thinking in relation to predominant themes in her personal narrative,
which often relate to rejection: “I am rejected once again. It took him over 3 minutes to
respond to my WhatsApp message .”She is unable to reflect on her immediate assump-
tions when she is with someone, and to correct these assumptions using further infor-
mation from memory or by moving to controlled mentalizing. When she is with her
partner, she relies predominantly on her external focus, which continually triggers
immediate and powerful assumptions that are not modified and corrected by being
checked out and calibrated within the interaction. She lives the experience rather than
grounding it in reality.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
The priority that Sarah gives to observable physical reality is hardly surprising, given her
lack of confidence about her representations of mind. The clinician notices her tendency to
focus on detail that seems to the clinician to be marginal in importance. Sarah is highly
superstitious and assigns significance to particular configurations of events that seem
improbable: the time it takes for the bus to arrive indicates whether the day is going to
be good or bad; the episodes of the soap she follows on television accurately reflect her
future. On one occasion when she is not greeted by the clinic ’s receptionist she assumes
that the clinic has taken a decision to ban her from attending as she is clearly not suitable
for MBT. The clinician notes that she is biased toward observable reality and fails to check
her judgments about internal reality.58 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Non-Mentalizing Modes/Ineffective Mentalizing
The MBT clinician is trained to be sensitive to indicators that mentalizing is vulnerable to
breakdown, and makes a considerable effort to identify when a patient shows signs of its
imminent collapse. The general indication is an effort by the patient to stabilize their
mental processes by using the “three-legged stool ”of psychic equivalence, teleological
mode, and pretend mode. These are the modes of functioning that strike the clinician most
clearly when the patient ’s dimensions of mentalizing are fixed in an imbalanced position.
Box 4.2 provides a reminder of what these ungainly terms mean, and lists some more
accessible terms that could be used to explain the non-mentalizing modes to patients.
Non-mentalizing modes are adaptive to the extent that they “save the day ”when disaster
would otherwise result due to extreme disorganization of thoughts and feelings. Psychic
equivalence supports an unerring belief in one ’s own perspective and an apparent inability
or unwillingness to represent and consider others ’perspectives. It is quickly identified from
a reliance on shallow schematic representations of oneself and others (e.g., victim/victim-
izer), and rigidity of self-experience, which can be both painful and immutable.
Sarah shows enough vulnerabilities in her use of the dimensions of mentalizing for
her mind states to stabilize in non-mentalizing modes. Her default low-mentalizing
modes can be identified during the assessment.
Clinical example: Sarah (continued)
Sarah feels unloved and unwanted, which in psychic equivalence is experienced as a
current and definite reality rather than an anxious thought. In addition, she is compelled
to act on undifferentiated feeling states; this means that the emotions she has when she is
alone, for example, undermine her mentalizing, resulting in behaviors that can reinstateBox 4.2 Quick reference for non-mentalizing/ineffective mentalizing.
Psychic equivalence : things are as I see them and no one can tell me different; thoughts
are facts; images are reality.
/C15Inside-Out Mind.
/C15Boom Brain.
/C15Blow-up time.
/C15Know and Now time.
Teleological mode : you are what you do; I am what my actions tell me.
/C15Outside-In Mind.
/C15Action Person.
/C15Doing time.
/C15Action not words.
Pretend mode : I am in my own world going round and round and it is unaffected by
anyone; I understand the complexity of others and myself; I ruminate and get nowhere in
particular.
/C15Bubble time.
/C15Talking the talk but not walking the walk.
/C15Bullshit mode.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 59
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
mental stability. In the past she has taken drugs and self-harmed; these days she goes out
to bars instead. Exploring this pathway, the MBT clinician elicits that Sarah feels better
about herself as soon as she gets changed and leaves her flat. When she enters a bar, she is
exhilarated and excited, and when a man looks at her she knows someone cares about her.
When Sarah feels compelled to go out in this way, it seems that a teleological mode
(or“Outside-In ”mode) has been activated, in which changes in the physical world can
cause powerful changes in her mental state, particularly her experience of herself.
Ultimately, her noticing someone (a man) noticing her can make her feel real, that she
matters, and, as it turns out, that she is “loved. ”Although what happens in the physical
world is generally highly informative and, in conjunction with other mentalistic infor-
mation, may well suggest the thoughts and motives of others, it is the unique reliance on
teleological thinking that is of concern to the clinician working with Sarah. The clinician
notes that, in this case, Sarah ’s adaptation to rely on environmental change and a specific
risky (albeit predictable) environment leads Sarah to be quite compulsive in her behav-
iors, which at times place her at risk of serious harm. The MBT clinician discusses
Sarah ’s teleological adaptation to the terrible empty feelings that she reports experiencing
when she is alone in her flat, so that it can become a focus of joint work in treatment.
Alongside teleological mode, there may be some indications that Sarah uses pretend
mode, which is also of concern to the clinician.
Clinical example: Sarah (continued)
Sarah is insistent that “everything is perfect, ”“just fine, ”when she is with her son. Of
course, the clinician will have the welfare of her son in mind throughout treatment. The
clinician will question and perhaps even express doubt about the claimed calm of their
relationship, and probe to see whether Sarah can talk about her son as a person with his
own character and not primarily discuss their relationship in transactional terms. Pretend-
mode thinking tends to be characterized by a blandness of description ( “He is fine, ”“He is a
good boy ”) with little elaboration or link to additional mental-state-imbued personal
narrative. Dialogue about Sarah ’s son tends to come to an unexpected stop or go around
in circles —“No, I do not worry about him, I am quite lucky, because he is such a good boy .”
Further probing elicits a restatement rather than an elaboration.
It is important to identify pretend mode if it is activated when Sarah is talking about
her relationship with her son, as her ability to support her son ’s development over time
requires her to be able to mentalize him as a person with his own very real needs and
wishes, which will be in conflict with hers at times. The MBT clinician is reminded of
Winnicott ’s description of how a “false self ”can be created in a child [ 6]. Being able to
represent her son as a person with an independent mind is essential if both he and the
mother –child relationship are to thrive.
Attachment Processes
MBT clinicians identify the dominant attachment processes that are most frequently
deployed by their patients. Awareness of interpersonal relationships and their impact on
patients ’lives is a core focus of MBT both as a medium of change —as mentalizing is the60 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
material of interpersonal relationships —and also as a target for improvement. Given that
evidence shows that attachment relationships are one of the common sources of difficul-
ties, they invariably become a priority for intervention, but not without qualification. In
the assessment process, the MBT clinician initiates an exploration of the details of the
patient ’s current and past relationships in an effort to identify recurring patterns. They
use a template of common attachment styles that are identified in people with BPD.
Research has shown that the most commonly adopted styles are insecure-avoidant and
insecure-ambivalent (also known as anxious-preoccupied). Furthermore, in a proportion
of BPD patients, both of these forms of insecure attachment style are present and interact
to create disorganized attachment, which is characterized by chaotic and unstable
interpersonal interactions [ 7] (see Box 4.3 ).
Few patients with BPD will describe relationships that reflect a secure attachment
style. It is possible, due to the limitations of the available assessment instruments, that
patients whose personality function is dominated by psychopathic and narcissistic traits
may appear to be secure in their attachments. In these instances, the clinician will have
other indications that this is an anomaly, given the range of other problems presented by
the patient. Having said that, it is unwise to simply impose the insecure-disorganized
attachment style on anyone with a BPD diagnosis and assume that all of the patient ’s
current relationships are dysfunctional. Some patients arrive with strong and secure
relationships that they are fighting to maintain, although their efforts are compromisedBox 4.3 Common attachment patterns in people with BPD.
Anxious-Avoidant
/C15Fear intimacy.
/C15Lack confidence.
/C15Try not to express emotions to others.
/C15Turn on people who try to get close to them.
/C15Are unable to manage themselves and so are constantly in contact with others.
Examples
“I am uncomfortable getting close to others. ”
“I want emotionally close relationships, but I find it difficult to trust others completely
or depend on them. ”
“I worry that I will be hurt if I allow myself to become too close to others. ”
“I don ’t do things like Valentine ’s Day or family Christmas. ”
Anxious-Ambivalent
/C15Over-involved and may be demanding in relationships.
/C15Seek reassurance and confirmation of their worth, while at the same time being
suspicious, vigilant, or frankly distrustful of others.
Examples
“I want to be really close to others, but I often find that others are reluctant to get as close
as I would like. ”
“I am uncomfortable being without close relationships, but I sometimes worry that
others don ’t value me as much as I value them. ”
“Does my partner really love me? ”The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 61
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
by the emotional and behavioral problems they bring to their interactions. The support-
ive nature of these relationships can be literally life-saving.
Clinical example: Sarah (continued)
Sarah shows evidence of an anxious-ambivalent attachment style —she desperately
reaches out to people but remains disequilibrated (very anxious, and inaccessible to
reassurance) even when she has achieved proximity to an attachment figure. Her inter-
actional pattern of making high demands on others but remaining quite dissatisfied with
the support that she receives is understandably causing problems with her current partner,
who gets angry and frustrated with her. There is evidence that the same relationship style
led her to feel trapped in her earlier relationship with the father of her child. She was
unable to leave him despite his violence toward her. She was dominated by him, con-
stantly felt she was doing something wrong, and ended up apologizing for herself. It was
only after they had separated that she realized she had been a victim of his abuse. When
the clinician raised the issue of possible repetition, she recognized the problem. However,
she was of the view that she was not in danger. This opinion was shared by the local social
services ’Child in Need team, which supported the view that Sarah ’s son should continue to
be looked after by both of his biological parents. In the MBT assessment, Sarah ’s decision
not to return to her previous relationship was considered a “moment of mentalizing
interest ”because she became able to assert her own wishes —a positive feature indicating
resilience and the ability to access a stable view of what she wanted and did not want.
Formulation
The information elicited during assessment is organized into a formulation —a written
account of the patient ’s problems that attempts to bring coherence to the patient ’s life
narrative using a mentalizing framework for understanding relationships, emotional
turmoil, impulsivity, and other difficulties [ 8]. In general, the conflict between the
patient ’s presenting problems and their life goals and values is highlighted in the
formulation to provide motivation for the therapy. For example, a patient might place
a high value on supportive relationships, which conflicts with their lack of self-control
and impulsive actions. Importantly, the initial focus for treatment and areas of mentaliz-
ing strength and resilience are identified. The aim of the formulation is twofold. First, it
establishes structure, coherence, and organization for the therapy, which is as important
for the clinician as it is for the patient when struggling against a background of psychic
equivalence, pretend mode, and teleological constructions. Second, it establishes a
collaborative approach in drawing together a shared understanding that is both mean-
ingful and respectful of the patient ’s point of view, including their priorities, concerns,
motives for change, and moral, ethical, and social values. It is therefore essential that the
formulation is negotiated and agreed with the patient.
The clinician:
1. writes a first draft of the working formulation in a language that is meaningful to the
patient, linking the most important presenting problems to the mentalizing
difficulties that have been identified
2. explains it to the patient and discusses it, modeling mentalizing through collaboration
3. asks the patient to consider the working formulation and to rewrite it, with support,
where necessary62 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
4. finally agrees the focus for the current psychotherapy sessions as a collaborative
clinical agreement.
Box 4.4 provides a summary template as an aide-memoire for clinicians to use when
developing a joint formulation. It includes a number of headings that the clinician bears in
mind when establishing an agreed clinical formulation. It is not necessary to follow the
exact content, and the domains of the formulation listed should be used flexibly. These are:
1. summary of values and problems
2. general vulnerability factors
3. resilience factors
4. mentalizing vulnerabilities —dimensional profile
5. use of low-mentalizing modes and their triggers
6. attachment style(s)
7. treatment goals
8. anticipated difficulties in group and individual treatment.
Box 4.4 Summary of formulation.
The formulation needs to be made in collaboration with the patient, using their words, and
should be aimed at their mentalizing level. It should not be technical or intellectual, and
should use ordinary language. The formulation should be revisited, made more complete,
and revised at clear points within the treatment.
Overall Formulation
/C15Developmental summary/family background/traumatic or difficult consequences (3 –4
sentences).
/C15Triggering situations for loss of mentalizing (1 sentence):
–In what situations do your interpersonal difficulties occur?
–What situations do you struggle with most?
/C15View of self at the time (1 sentence):
–How do you see yourself at this moment?
/C15Experience of other at the time/adult relational pattern (1 sentence):
–What do you think is in the mind of the other and how does that affect you?
/C15Dominant affect/most difficult emotions (1 sentence):
–What feelings are present in that moment?
/C15Ways of coping/reaction, including self-harm and destructive behavior (1 sentence):
–These are likely to fit with non-mentalizing.
/C15Strengths (1 sentence):
–Despite these difficulties, what have you managed to achieve?
General Vulnerability Factors
/C15Past experiences.
/C15Present social, financial, and relational circumstances.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 63
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Sarah ’s working formulation, which includes examples of flexibility in the summary
headings outlined earlier and in Box 4.4 , is shown in the following clinical example and
summarized as a diagram in Figure 4.1 .Box 4.4 (cont. )
Resilience
Example(s) of effective personal change and overcoming adversity (two main illustrations
with emphasis on the use of mentalizing of self to increase self-confidence and self-
esteem).
Mentalizing Vulnerabilities and Low-Mentalizing Modes
/C15Summary of mentalizing profile/key mentalizing vulnerabilities.
/C15Should be written in ordinary language.
/C15Needs to be relevant to key non-mentalizing modes:
–psychic equivalence
–pretend mode
–teleological mode.
/C15Should have relevance to mentalizing dimensions and indicate when there is
imbalance between:
–automatic/controlled mentalizing
–self/other
–internal/external
–affect/cognition.
Attachment Styles
Patterns of relationships, with examples. Keep in mind for exploration (but there is no need
to“categorize ”):
/C15anxious-ambivalent
/C15anxious-avoidant
/C15disorganized.
Agreed Treatment Goals
Given the understanding that has been outlined, we agreed the following goals for
psychological treatment:
/C15regarding yourself and ways in which you act
/C15regarding your relationships with other people
/C15regarding making changes in your life and changing or increasing activities.
These goals will relate to the examples that you may bring into the group, and it would
be useful to consider how other people ’s examples link with the areas you would like
help with.
Anticipated Difficulties in Group and Individual Treatment
This also includes ending treatment and what the desired mentalizing changes and
behaviors would be.64 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Clinical Example: Formulation Discussed with Sarah
We have talked about a lot of things and I will summarize those aspects that we have
identified as really important for you to focus on in MBT. I have put these down as our
initial “aims ”to be agreed.
Strengths
You have shown personal strength in very difficult circumstances over a long time —right
from the start things were really frightening in your childhood, and you had to grow up too
quickly and look after yourself. Unsurprisingly, this was hard for you, and as a teenager you
used drugs to ease some of the pain. But later you managed to stop misusing them —well
done you! You also managed to use your strength to stop cutting yourself even though it is
still tempting.
A final impressive decision was to stick to your decision to leave Jack ’s father despite
him trying to persuade you to return. You held on to what you wanted then rather than
give in to him, which had been your tendency. We need to identify those times when you
decide what is best for you compared with those times when you decide on things
because someone else wants you to.
Aim : Let us work out what gives you this strength and build on it.
One more recent aspect has been your ability to work things out with Jack ’s father
about your shared care for Jack.
Who Am I and What Do I Want?
You often have problems working out what you think and what you feel. This is really
difficult when you are on your own in your flat and also when you are with your
boyfriend. In these situations, you have feelings that are intense and take you over.
You found it difficult to name those f eelings but you know they make you “get out ”and
“do things. ”
Sometimes, mostly when you feel bad about yourself, you try to work out what is going
on in other people ’s minds and be whatever they want you to be —just like with Jack ’s dad.
It makes you feel better, but then you start resenting them.
Aim: Knowing and naming what I feel and think about myself.
Action Person and Outside-In Mind
On your own you feel “Yuk”and want to get out to be with people as you feel better then,
as long as people show that they like you. This has led to you putting yourself at risk of
harm. So, looking at what triggers Action Person and Outside-In Mind is one of the first
things to think about in therapy.
Aim : Action Person and Outside-In Mind: what brings them on and how can this be
prevented?
Know and Now Mind
When you are with people you can become convinced that they don ’t like you. This is
really powerful with your boyfriend, and you quickly become convinced that he does not
love you even though he has said he does. You get so anxious that you keep asking him
about it but cannot be reassured. This is when you are in Know and Now Mind. It is so real
that you cannot think of anything else.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 65
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Know and Now Mind makes you more “needy ”and then action becomes necessary,
like seeing him straightaway. He needs to show you he loves you. This is how Know and
Now Mind works.
Know and Now Mind comes on when you feel criticized. We need to watch out for how
sensitive you can be and check it out when it happens in therapy, perhaps most easily in
the individual sessions we talked about, but also in the group, too.
Aim : Learn when Know and Now Mind is functioning and get out of it. It is best to be
alert to when it is just starting if possible.
Relationships
You mentioned that you try to please your current partner. There was a similar situation
with Jack ’s father for a long time. You worried that you were not pleasing him enough and
that you were always doing something wrong —being “clingy. ”We talked about “anxious-
ambivalent attachment, ”and you will discuss this more in the first phase of MBT in the
introductory group.
Perhaps this style of relationships links with not knowing who you are. It will be
important to look at it in the group therapy when you are with other people, to see if
you have the same pattern with others there —will you try to be liked, for example, or find
it hard to stand up for yourself?
The good relationship you have with your son is important, and you have said that you
“know you are a good mother. ”We need to build on that. You also told us that Jack ’s social
support worker is concerned that you can go into your own world a bit when you are with
him. We called that “Bubble Mode. ”
Aim : Build on the effective aspects of your relationships. Understand what creates
the problem interactions in relationships.
MBT
We talked about how some of these feelings and behaviors might come up in therapy. For
example, you might even worry that you aren ’t doing well enough in therapy or that you
have displeased your therapist. Naturally you will go into Action Person/Outside-In Mind if
this happens, and will want to see your therapist quickly to be reassured. So we need to
work out what happens if you worry too much between sessions and get into this state
of mind.
Aims at the Beginning
We can list the aims I have suggested here if we agree them, and I have organized a
cycle of problems for us to use so that we can consider what sends your mind into
Outside-In Mind and Inside-Out Mind. When that happens, things start to go wrong
for you.
We still have to decide how to measure if we are achieving our aims and things are
getting better for you.
The manner of creating and delivering the formulation enhances the patient ’s
mentalizing by generating a shared mental process with a joint goal embodied in the
“collaborative clinical agreement. ”This “we-mode ”process ( “we-mode ”is described in
more detail in Chapter 2 ) entails two minds focusing on a shared object —in this case, the66 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
task of defining the best focus for treatment using a shared conceptual framework for
scaffolding the patient ’s problems in the context of their overarching values and ambi-
tions in life. This process is the first step toward stimulating an experience of we-mode
functioning, which remains the organizing principle of the intervention.
The process of developing the formulation is made easier because part of the process
involves establishing the tentative nature of mentalizing —both the clinician and the patient
know that neither of them has to get the formulation “right. ”There can be no fixed
formulation in MBT, as the treatment is inherently dynamic; all mentalizing leads to fresh
understandings and changes of perspective, which drive reformulation of the collaborative
agreement. The formulation is labeled a “working formulation ”to highlight the fact that
it is open to revision. In MBT, the formulation following assessment is a starting point
rather than a fixed map of the terrain to be covered, which is as yet unexplored. What is
set is the length and intensity of the treatment. The working formulation can identify
questions to be answered but should avoid pre-defining solutions.
The formulation does not require a sophisticated psychological understanding on the
part of the clinician about the complex determinants of mental health problems. As we
have said in Part I of this book, mentalizing is rooted in everyday experiences, and the
(relatively sophisticated) understanding that all human beings use to interpret individualRelationship
event
Anxiety about
being loved 
Want to be
with partner
but they seem
rejecting 
More anxiety
Mentalizing
problems—
Action/Inside-
Out Mind Feel bad about
oneselfRetreat and
become 
uncertain Approach again
Sarah
Fig. 4.1 Sarah ’s cycle of problems.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 67
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
and social action. Adopting an expert stance would, in any case, break a defining
principle of MBT (see Chapter 3 ) that asks the clinician not to take over mentalizing
for the patient and not to use their ability to mentalize to compensate for the challenges
experienced by the patient, and thereby risk creating a relationship of dependence.
However, the alert reader will note that the delivery of a formulation, however collabora-
tively this is approached, breaks this princ iple to some extent. Our defense for allowing
the principle to be breached at this point i s based not on the content of the formulation
b u to nt h ep r o c e s se n g e n d e r e di ni t sf o r m a t i o na n dd e l i v e r y .T h ef o r m u l a t i o ni s
presented as a shared approach to a complex puzzle that needs to be put together piece
by piece, refined, and improved in joint exploration, rather than as a statement of
certainty about motivation and cause. The t errain to be explored will look different as
each peak is reached, to reveal further hei ghts! MBT is not about scaling the summit;
rather, it is about going for a hike in the mou ntainous terrain of the mind. In practical
terms, this means that the MBT clinician is as ked, jointly with the patient (who is seen
as a conversational partner in this regard) , to revisit the working formulation on a 3-
monthly basis at the very minimum, or when indicated by events such as:
/C15repeated crises
/C15new challenges and problems that were not evident at the time of assessment
/C15resources to be taken advantage of that were not known about previously (e.g., a new
relationship)
/C15a new understanding of determinants that changes the current formulation
/C15lack of progression.
Sarah ’s working formulation mentions a nu mber of areas of concern, which were
discussed with her. In particular, the clini cian and Sarah contrasted the tension between
her values of wanting a stronger and more stable relationship with her partner and her son,
and her going out to bars and engaging in risky behavior that might undermine “living ”
those values. An agreement was made that Sarah would try to inhibit her “action ”response
to loneliness, and attempt to accept it as something of interest that could be addressed in
other ways. In the first section of the formulation some of her strengths are outlined, which
include her ability to stop using self-harming and her ability to stand up to the father of
her child and assert herself. These positive ch anges need exploring not only to strengthen
them but also to understand how they came about and how Sarah might harness them
further. The second section of the formulation s ummarizes the difficulties that Sarah has in
identifying and constructively deploying her su bjective self-states, along with her struggle to
maintain a coherent self-representation over time. She is not sure who she is or what she
wants. The target in treatment is to harness, develop, and stabilize the “self”pole of the self/
other dimension of mentalizing. Sarah ’s“other ”mentalizing pole is overactive, as indicated
by her constantly trying to work out the mind s t a t e so fo t h e r sa st h e ya p p l yt oh e r ,w h i c hs h e
is unable to do, as indeed it is hard for anyone to do on any long-term basis. Therefore
the self/other mentalizing dime nsion becomes a focus for Sarah ’s treatment, and is placed in
the current aims so that both she and the cli nician are alert to how it will play out in
treatment. The next sections summarize some of the low-mentalizing mo des, namely psychic
equivalence and teleological mode (here t ermed Know and Now Mind or Inside-Out Mind,
and Action Person or Outside-In Mind, respectiv ely, when relevant), that are activated when
Sarah is under stress. The purpose of identifying and naming these mind states is so that
Sarah becomes aware of them and both she and the MBT clinician can “name and note ”
them as they occur, and then explore what tri ggered them in the moment. Finally, there is a68 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
summary of her attachment strategies as understood at the beginning of treatment. Further
details will emerge in treatment, and these can be added to the formulation over time.
Psychoeducation: MBT-Introductory Group
MBT-Introductory group (MBT-I)*introduces the framework of MBT to the patient.
Alongside this, it has a number of wider aims:
1. to inform/educate patients about mentalizing and personality disorder and associated
areas of knowledge
2. to prepare patients for long-term treatment
3. to increase patients ’motivation
4. to elicit more detail about patients ’mentalizing capacities
5. to confirm the initial assessment and diagnosis.
In summary, the primary purpose of MBT-I is to ensure that patients entering
treatment do so with a reasonable understanding of the process they are engaging in, that
they are aware of the focus of treatment, and that they appreciate the expectations placed
on them as well as the expectations they can have about treatment. Patients with BPD are
offered 10 –12 MBT-I initial sessions in a weekly group with others. All the patients start at
the same time and have to attend a minimum of two out of the first three group sessions in
order to continue in the rest of the program. This condition is imposed on the basis that
failure to attend the initial sessions, which cover the topics of mentalizing and non-
mentalizing, leads to problems in learning about the topics covered in the later sessions.
However, patients who do not attend these early sessions are not discharged but are offered
a place in the next available new group. Patients who remain in the group need to attend
75% of the subsequent sessions in order to move on to MBT-G (the structure of MBT-G is
discussed in Chapter 5 ). People with ASPD are offered 6 –8 sessions; recommended
adaptations to the core modules of MBT-I to make them more appropriate for working
with people with ASPD are discussed in Chapter 7 (see also [ 9]). The total number and
order of sessions are not essential factors for the goals of MBT-I to be achieved; imparting
knowledge, increasing understanding and motivation through empowerment, and develop-
ing a therapeutic alliance with clarity about the patient ’s problems are more important.
At the end of MBT-I, all patients have a meeting with a senior member of the clinical
team to review their experience of MBT-I and plan further treatment.
Format of MBT-I
MBT-I is organized as group psychoeducation with a maximum of 10 patients in a
group. The sessions are organized over 12 weeks, and each session lasts for 1.5 hours.
Some modules contain a lot of content and can extend over two sessions if necessary. In
the course of the sessions, some patients may realize that MBT is not for them, and the
clinician does not expect that all patients will fit into the treatment model outlined in
MBT-I. The treatment model needs to be relevant to the patient ’s difficulties. If it
becomes apparent that MBT might not be right for the patient, the clinician and patient
review treatment and consider alternatives if appropriate.
*A detailed manual for MBT-I is available at www.annafreud.org/media/14626/mbt-i-for-internet
.pdfThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 69
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Session Structure
Each group session follows a similar sequence:
1. welcome to patients
2. summary of the previous session ’s material
3. feedback from the previous session ’s homework
4. introduction to a new topic
5. discussion relating the topic to the participants ’symptoms and personal lives
6. final summary and discussion of homework.
The sessions are built on the following principles.
/C15Exercises are arranged in a sequence, progressing from emotionally “distant ”
scenarios to some that are more personalized.
/C15Discussions are related to participants ’personal experience only when the group has
developed a cohesive atmosphere and some trust has been established
between participants.
/C15New exercises and illustrations are encouraged if they increase the psychoeducational
understanding of the topic.
/C15Homework is voluntary and generally requires the participants to increase their focus
on their mind states.
/C15Over the course of the sessions, participants build up a “directory ”of indicators of
non-mentalizing (e.g., use of particular words, certainty of opinion).
Each topic is accompanied by a handout and a worksheet. The topics include
mentalizing and personality disorder, ineffective mentalizing, emotions and how to
manage them, attachment, and treatment expectations.
Role of Group Leader
The group leader, a clinician, remains “in charge ”of the group throughout each session
and across all 12 sessions, and takes an active role in structuring the group. The term “in
charge ”is used here not to suggest that the group leader is autocratic, but rather to imply
that they manage the group carefully to ensure that each topic is covered adequately and
discussed in enough detail to make certain that patients are aware of the relevance of the
topic. The group leader often makes use of a whiteboard and/or flip chart to highlight
key points or note down contributions from participants in the course of discussions.
Crucially, the group leader models a mentalizing stance throughout any discussion, while
maintaining an expert stance in terms of knowledge about mentalizing and personality
disorder. This balance is important. A mentalizing or “not-knowing ”stance can become
confused with a lack of knowledge or understanding. However, nothing could be further
from the truth. The application of our knowledge to inform our own mental states and to
stimulate thought in others is the essence of mentalizing. The group leader models the
mentalizing stance by demonstrating that their knowledge, although that of an expert,
can be extended, clarified, and enriched by the contributions of the group members.
Critically, the group leader ’s mind can be changed by the minds of others; the partici-
pants ’understanding of and ideas about a given topic under discussion feed back to the
discussion itself. Hence there is an emphasis on the group leader stimulating discussion
among the group members. Maintaining a balance between providing information to the70 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
group members and learning from their perspectives is a key skill for group leaders. The
group leader should be careful not to be too “lecturing ”in the sessions, as this tends to
encourage passivity in the group members. The leader needs to generate some group
process even though the group is task oriented. The process engendered should be
related to the topic of the group so that there can be a seamless return to task.
There is a certain amount of material that must be covered in each session, and the
group leader needs to follow the manual closely. Experience has shown that it is easy to
digress and get lost, which impedes the completion of the program. It is also important
that learning takes place through the participants ’own activities, although the group
leader maintains a psychoeducational perspective. The group leader uses examples given
by the patients to illustrate points related to the topic under discussion.
Treatment Phase: Structure of Individual MBT Sessions
Empathic Validation, Clarification, and Elaboration of Experience
The MBT clinician follows a stepwise intervention process in each session [ 10]. Of course
these steps have to be implemented skillfully and should not be followed slavishly. Often
the patient and clinician will follow a different pathway, dictated by the clinical material
presented or the state of mind of the patient. In principle, the first step is to identify with
the patient what is currently troubling them and to explore the problems within the
context of the working formulation. This is the empathic exploratory phase of the session,
which leads to empathic emotional validation of the patient ’s experiences both as they are
remembered and as they are experienced in the present as the story is told and reflected on
during the session. Empathic validation has three main components (see Chapter 3 ):
1. showing the patient that their emotions at the time and in the current moment are
recognized and resonated with
2. empathizing with the basic emotion more than the social emotion, which is often a
secondary emotion —the basic emotion is the driver of existence
3. identifying and also recognizing the effect that the emotional experience is having on
the patient.
The clinician explores the initial narrative using a not-knowing stance to try to
expand the perspectives on the story and to gauge the focus for further work in the
session. Gradually a theme linked to the current formulation is likely to emerge. If it does
not, the clinician can ask how the subject matter links to the formulation and, if this
remains unclear, consider rewriting part of the working formulation making use of the
new material.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
Sarah began her session by telling the clinician that she had been sitting on her own at
home and was trying to “busy ”herself. But in the end she had had to go out. She explained
that it had been no good and that she had failed again ( showing the self-judgment and self-
criticism Sarah is prone to ).
CLINICIAN :Let’s not jump to such quick judgment without working out what happened. ( An attempt
to stop Sarah immediately going into non-mentalizing mode in which she has a fixed view of herself. )The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 71
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Tell me more about sitting on your own. Put yourself back there and get me to where you were in
your thoughts and your feelings at the time. ( Clinician using a not-knowing stance, trying to
explore the “there and then ”from the “here and now, ”and stopping Sarah falling into the experience
of the “there and then in the here and now ”during the telling of the story. )
SARAH :I cannot describe it. My insides are churning and I want to walk around. It is horrible and then
I think that no one wants to see me and then that my boyfriend doesn ’t love me. I tried to phone
him but he didn ’t pick up. So I just thought he knew it was me and so he didn ’t answer. Then
I knew I wanted to go out. And that makes me feel better and a bit calmer. ( Uncertainty of self-
experience and psychic equivalence with teleological mode. Note that although Sarah says “calmer, ”
she means that the excitement of risk taking has the paradoxical effect of calming her. )
CLINICIAN :What about this churning —where is it in you and what do you make of it? ( Asking Sarah
to mentalize her bodily experience to see if she can move toward embodied mentalizing. )
SARAH :It is my stomach and it means that I am frightened but I don ’t know what about.
CLINICIAN :Hmm. That is pretty dreadful, to have such a strong physical feeling that you can ’t escape
from and not know what it is about and it doesn ’t even seem to link with anything that is
happening. Let ’s think about that. ( Empathy with a small effort at clarification highlighting the
inescapability and the namelessness of the dread. Much is communicated here by the way the words
are spoken rather than purely by the content. )
SARAH :It just always makes me walk around and I don ’t know what is in my head or what I want to
do. I just know that going out gets rid of it and makes me better. To be honest, you made me feel
it a bit just now.
CLINICIAN :So the churning and anxiety has nothing up here ( clinician points to his head ). As you put
yourself there now, what are you thinking? How does it feel?
SARAH :I want to get up and walk out. You don ’t think I am trying hard enough. ( Sudden reactivity,
perhaps activated by the bodily experience, experienced for real in psychic equivalence —"there and
then ”moving into the “here and now. ”)
CLINICIAN :Really? Where has that come from? I am not aware of thinking that ( clinician reports
directly what is in his mind ). In fact, I was thinking that you are trying so hard ( rewarding in order to
down-regulate the self-questioning ). So it seems to bring up harsh and unpleasant thoughts that
you think others have about you when you are on your own and you end up confused about how
you feel and what you think. It doesn ’t surprise me that you then need to get out and see
someone who can show you that you are a person worth seeing ( an empathically based
clarification ).
SARAH :I just want to get someone to love me. I have always wanted to be loved and I was looking at
pictures of me with my father yesterday and things have never been normal. All I want is to have
a happy and loving family and nothing has ever been like that. I tried everything to stay with
Jack ’s father even when he was violent. I just wanted things to be normal with a mum and dad72 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
and baby. But it is never going to be like that, is it? I can ’t have anything that is normal. Even now
every day I think John ( her partner ) is going to leave me. With Jack ’s father I did everything to
make him feel good so that he would want me —but that ’s all messed up, isn ’t it?
CLINICIAN :What makes you say it is messed up?
SARAH :Well —I was doing things that he wanted me to do and not what I wanted to do and I don ’t
know why as, when I think about it, he was using me most of the time. That is what is messed up.
I am just some kind of nutter that people exploit.
CLINICIAN :What concerns me is your sense that you know now that you didn ’t want to do some of
the things you did for him or put up with his treatment of you, but then you didn ’t realize that.
What was happening then? ( Clinician trying to place time between then and now to encourage
more reflective, less affective mentalizing about the event.)
SARAH :It was that stuff we talked about. The things he made me do. ( Sarah relays a sexually
traumatic memory associated with Jack ’s father. Feeling sexually traumatized and feeling exploited
but helpless left her feeling “horrid. ”This is not the first time that these experiences are referred to, but
there is slightly greater clarity. At the end, her mentalizing fades and she seems confused. ) I don ’t
know who I am or what I want. How do I work that out when I am in the situation?
CLINICIAN :That ’s something wehave to work out so that you are more sure of yourself. ( Clinician
aims to share responsibility with Sarah and stress that she is not alone when she remembers
traumatic experiences from her past. Then he moves back or rewinds to where the narrative was
more coherent and mentalizing was more evident. ) You tried really hard to have a happy family
and you wished for it so much that you even did things that you now think you didn ’t really want
to do. And at the moment you feel you will never have that sense of being together and relaxed
—and that hopelessness is horrible. Perhaps we can work out now what you really think and feel
about things with John, as you mention you might be starting to do things for him that you are
not sure you really want to do, and you really don ’t want to feel the horrid feelings of being
exploited. ( Empathic validation to anchor the discussion and join together with Sarah. )
The clinician is now using an empathic validating summary to focus the session on
an aspect of the formulation, namely Sarah ’s ability to access a robust, albeit subjective,
experience of a sense of self that is distinct from how others tell her she is. Can she
“know ”this enough to be more assertive and not necessarily acquiesce to others ’
demands?The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 73
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
74 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 75
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
76 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Not-Knowing and Managing the Mentalizing Process
The not-knowing stance of the MBT clinician is an active stance aimed at promoting the
exploration of mental states in relation to actions and events. The clinician seeks to
support the patient to take a step back and consider what lies behind their actions and
inner experiences. The stance creates a tension (an implicit pressure) for the patient to be
reflective rather than reactive.
This is a double-edged sword. On the one hand, reflection is a necessary mental process
in everyday life, as all people need to monitor themselves as they express their current
feelings and thoughts. On the other hand, a patient can feel under too much pressure and
forced to think about things that they either cannot easily understand or do not want to
talk about because they trigger intense and painful feelings. Therefore the stance has to be
implemented skilfully and sensitively, taking into account the patient ’s current mentalizing
capacities and remembering the aim —to create a range of perspectives “on the fly ”to stopThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 77
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
the patient becoming fixed in a single viewpoint and open up the possibility of them seeing
something for what it is rather than what it seems to be.
The not-knowing stance is a method used to stimulate being imaginative, able to
contemplate alternatives and to use one ’s imagination in a balanced way that is neither
untethered from reality and shifting into pretend mode, nor too closely bound to
physical facts, which liberates the person from psychic equivalence. Not knowing can
help to achieve this balance, and enables mentalizing to be managed well. MBT clinicians
have to “not know ”(or“un-know ”) mental states, to resist being presumptive but not be
indifferent to finding them out (i.e., to show genuine curiosity). In life, people who are
experienced as genuinely supportive are curious about things, constantly learning and
asking questions, rarely drawing premature conclusions, and frequently leaving things
open rather than seeking closure. Wisdom is admirable but is helpful only in tiny doses.
End points are not the goal; rather, the journey, and what might be discovered along
the route, is. To put it bluntly, MBT is not an insight-oriented approach where the
clinician provides a model-motivated “interpretation ”of the patient ’s experience and
behavior. It is an approach of collaborative discovery where the clinician ’s role is merely
to scaffold the recovery of mentalizing. This may involve less glamour than other
orientations in which the interpersonal scenario of patient and clinician is apparently
“discovered ”but closer scrutiny shows it to have been preordained by texts representing
accumulated clinical experience. MBT is respectful of and not skeptical in relation to
such clinical generalizations. It finds a balance between the risk of undermining personal
agency by providing solutions, and the benefit to the patient from those understandings,
and favors the un-knowing option, particularly with patients at the more severe end of
the spectrum of BPD.
The scaffolding of MBT is developed in MBT-I, and Sarah has attended this group for
10 sessions. In the MBT-I group, the clinician illustrates the not-knowing stance. One
possible way of doing this is as follows.
Clinical Example: Learning about the Not-Knowing Stance
The clinician is holding what appears to be a book.
CLINICIAN :I am going to ask a silly question. What am I holding?
The clinician has to deal with some blank faces as the patients worry that this is such a silly
question with an obvious answer that it might be a trick. They are of course right to some
extent.
CLINICIAN :I told you it was a silly question. But bear with me please —what am I holding?
PATIENTS :A book.
CLINICIAN :What makes you say it is a book?
PATIENTS :It is obviously a book.
CLINICIAN :What characteristics does it have?
The members of the group describe the shape of the book, the spine with a title on it, the
front with a picture, a title, and an author ’s name, and a number of other features.
CLINICIAN :What sort of book? Is it a crime novel, a children ’s book, a romantic novel?78 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
PATIENTS :Don ’t know. The title and picture look like a romantic novel.
CLINICIAN :What is it about the picture?
And so the discussion goes on until the clinician or one of the patients suggests reading
the book to find out.
CLINICIAN :Exactly. We will have to read it to find out. So let ’s have a look inside.
The clinician opens the book, revealing that it is a box of chocolates disguised as a book.
CLINICIAN :So, looking at something more carefully shows it is not what it first seemed.
Presupposition about minds is even more obvious than it is with books. We do not perceive
thoughts —we hypothesize about them. And we are often wrong. Being wrong is fine.
Convincing yourself that you could not possibly be wrong is the risky attitude. The therapy you
are about to undertake is all about being less certain and more doubtful than you are used to
being. And take my word for it, that will help! I am absolutely certain. ( The irony and self-mocking
used here are deliberate in MBT. They turn out to encourage mentalizing .)
The process of discovery is the essence of the not-knowing stance; when applied to
understanding self-states, the mental states of others, and social interactions, it stimulates
mentalizing. Assumptions no longer dictate re ality but create curiosity and exploration,
without which we are misled and unable to learn. This is the stance that the MBT clinician
has to model for the patient, who so often has closed down their curiosity and interest in other
people and their minds as the results have led to incomprehension and, at times, horror.
Sarah needs to be able to differentiate her feelings, locate them in context, and link
them to other experiences to give them substance, meaning, and continuity. She experi-
ences her inner world quite passively, especially when she is alone. She needs to develop a
sense of being able to manage it actively. The first part of helping her to generate a sense
of mental agency and autonomy is to notice her current states and then name them.
Altering her reliance on reflection through others and the “people-pleasing ”interactions
that this generates can be addressed only by her developing increased awareness of her
inner states and greater confidence about asserting her own wishes.
Contrary Moves
Mentalizing flexibility is stimulated by the clinician ’s attention to the dimensions of menta-
lizing as the patient reports and reflects on their personal narratives. In Sarah ’sc a s e ,t h es e l f /
other dimension is one of those obviously out of balance, caused by a lack of self/other
differentiation. Her ability to represent others ’thinking about her in a way that soothes her
and informs constructive interaction is unstable. She loses her sense of being loved and as a
result she uses most of her mind power to monitor others ’mental states, asking them to
reassure her so that she can rebuild a transitory experience of “feeling loved. ”As her
attention turns to others, she inevitably neglects her inner world and abandons what should
be her privileged position regarding her own self-experiences. The MBT clinician may focus
on generating a sense of agency, but at the same time has to increase the adaptive flexibility of
the self/other dimension. To achieve this, the clinician engages in contrary moves , encour-
aging Sarah to elaborate her self-experience when her attention is exclusively focused onThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 79
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
other minds, and, equally, encouraging a deeper awareness of the other when her superficial
and unhelpful depictions of the other suggest that she is replacing detailed mind-reading
with a projection of the self, creating a “needed ”rather than realistic image of the other. In
essence, although she is apparently focused on the other, she is in fact stuck supporting a
vulnerable self, which is felt to be at risk of disintegration. Of course, when Sarah is being
supported in building a felt sense of agency, the clinician may focus on either the self or the
other pole for considerable periods, as the aim is to achieve improved self/other differenti-
ation by stimulating flexibility. In MBT, becoming comfortable with moving across all of the
mentalizing dimensions is the key. Good mentalizing involves using the dimensions fluently
to ensure optimal adaptation to each social context.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
SARAH :I keep asking my boyfriend what he thinks of me. To be frank, he is a bit fed up with it. But
I can ’t stop myself. I become uncertain that he cares about me. I convince myself he does, but
then I start having these terrible doubts. I try to work out whether he does or not by watching
carefully how he does things and whether he does things for me. Like last night he was cooking
and I said that I don ’t like chilies much. He said he would only put in a few then. So I counted how
many he was putting in. Why? It ’s so stupid.
Here, Sarah is anxious to sustain self-coherence and her mentalizing comes under the sway of
the Outside-In Mind/teleological mode. She is focused on her partner ’s mental state, but —
unable to achieve a clear representation from looking beyond —she has defaulted to external
behavioral indications. On reflection during the session, she recognizes that this was not
entirely sensible.
CLINICIAN :So where are you in this? You were able to tell him about your dislike of chilies. That ’sg r e a t
—you so often hold back on making your preferences clear. ( Here the clinician identifies and
reinforces helpful mentalizing. ) But somehow you lost having a feeling for what he felt about you —
otherwise why judge him in terms of the number of chilies? You kind of lose sight of him and start
to worry about his feelings for you, but how does that worry leave you feeling about you? ( Here the
clinician tries to encourage flexibility by switching the focus on to the self —ac o n t r a r ym o v e . )
SARAH :I don ’t know what mine are except I know I really like being with him.
CLINICIAN :What tells you that? ( Here the clinician is recapturing the not-knowing stance, trying to help
Sarah to elaborate and strengthen her “felt”self.)
SARAH :I just feel good when I am with him. I feel I can relax. It is just that that feeling can disappear
so quickly.
CLINICIAN :Now you have made me curious. Tell me what you think about when you reach that sense
of relaxation. What are your thoughts about yourself when the feeling good is there? ( Again, the
clinician does not assume he knows. In a way he could take it for granted that feeling relaxed is good
and is filled with general positivity about the self. But the not-knowing stance demands that further
elaboration of the self-state is provided. )
The clinician has moved Sarah subtly from her preoccupation with her boyfriend ’s state
of mind to deeper scrutiny of her own changing thoughts about herself. He keeps her
working on her own thoughts and feelings about herself and then engages in the opposite
movement, asking her about her boyfriend ’s mind states in relation to hers.80 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
SARAH :It just switches into what it was like with Jack ’s father. I am not good enough for him. I was
not good enough for my father. I am not good enough for anyone.
CLINICIAN :Do you think you could share this kind of thinking with John? What do you think he would
make of it? Could he give a response that was more reassuring than counting the number of chilies?
Practice makes perfect, so the MBT clinician keeps engaging in this rebalancing proced-
ure, pushing the patient between the poles of mentalizing on each dimension. Sarah ’s
tendency to polarize is not resolved at any point, but movement seems to get easier —among
other things, she begins to anticipate the clinician ’s line of questioning. She notices the
contrary moves. Could it be that she is developing an image of the clinician ’sm i n d ?
Intervention using contrary moves to “oil”all of the other dimensions is necessary if
fully flexible mentalizing is to be established. The patient who overuses cognitive
processing is coaxed to pay attention to and trust more in their feelings. But when
emotional processes predominate, questioning then focuses on the beliefs and expect-
ations that drive these feelings, and the patient is pushed to increase the recruitment of
cognition to help to manage the emotions.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
SARAH :I am very good with Jack. I make all his favorite foods and make sure that he is clean and tidy
when he goes to school. I know that if other people start to think that I am not looking after him
properly they will tell the Child in Need team and they will start suggesting that his father looks
after him more. ( Cognitive/external determining action; not thinking beyond. )
CLINICIAN :Oh, that is so worrying. ( Starting with supportive empathy. ) But tell me, what does it feel
like to be a mother who is being observed all the time? ( Question relating to emotion with focus on
the self. )
SARAH :I don ’t mind, as I show them that he is being well looked after. ( Sarah ’s realistic anxiety about
her son being taken away makes movement away from the observed, cognitive other quite hard .)
CLINICIAN :I see. And how do you feel inside when you see that Jack is clean and tidy? ( The clinician is
making a second attempt to shift to emotional self-focus. )
SARAH :I feel proud. I am a proper mum. I don ’t leave Jack dirty and neglected like I was.
CLINICIAN :Ah. So you feel proud. That is quite something. ( The clinician is not missing an opportunity
to be reinforcing and to show the value in mentalizing. ) And is that proud just of yourself, or also
of him?
SARAH :Well, I feel proud of myself as I can get him to dress properly and look good. But when I look
at him, I think maybe he will feel better about himself than I am feeling about how I am.
CLINICIAN :That is important. We don ’t often talk about what Jack thinks. What about him? How do
you think he thinks and feels about having Sarah as his mum? ( The clinician is moving to new
mentalizing other territory, trying to achieve a balance between cognition and affect. )The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 81
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The clinician persists in his efforts to get Sarah to use her emotional experiences to
think about her relationship with her son, concerned that she thinks that receiving
physical attention is all that is required for his healthy development. Her history of deep
deprivation tells the clinician that this could become a problem. Sarah has great difficulty
in reaching the part of herself that experienced neglect —she finds it hard to recall what
she thought and what she felt when she was a child exposed to neglect and adversity. She
finds it easier to think of childcare in cognitive and externally readily verifiable terms of
“eating well ”and “being clean. ”Yet if she does not take a deeper, more mentalizing
interest in her relationship with Jack, he will suffer in terms of constructing his own
sense of mental self, adding to the cycles of generational traumatization that we see
clinically every day. To prevent this, and being implicitly aware of (mentalizing) the
Child in Need team, the clinician aims to free Sarah from the constraints of her
teleological thinking, which has been enabling her to care for Jack physically but, when
dominant, has prevented her from giving due attention to emotional states and their
contribution to his development and the beneficial unfolding of the mother –child
relationship.
Thus, in MBT, a patient who relies on excessively externally focused mentalizing is
stimulated to consider the internal experience of others and themselves.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
SARAH :So you think that I am not doing very well here and I should be better by now.
CLINICIAN :Whoa! Where has that come from? Can you get me to how you have come to that? I am
not aware that I thought that at all! ( Stopping and exploring and insisting on controlled mentalizing
to appraise the assumption. )
SARAH :Well, when I was talking then you crossed your arms, which looks to me like you are fed up.
CLINICIAN :I am sorry I did that. I was not aware of doing it at all and I forgot momentarily just how
sensitive you are to the meaning of small gestures. You just have to bear with us insensitive folk.
Next time could you warn me when I am doing something like that and then we can stop and
you can help me to reflect on why I might have done it.
Sarah might or might not be accurate. She is using her well-attuned and superbly
sensitive external mentalizing to fully inform her understanding about the clinician ’s
mental state. The clinician should not challenge here. Rather, he encourages slowing the
process down and checking it out. This way, the issue does not focus on a question about
whether Sarah ’s assumption is correct or incorrect. It is about whether she can stop and
explore before continuing headlong into well-primed negativity.
Intervening in Low Mentalizing
In any session the clinician is likely to encounter problems with the “how”of the
patient ’s attempts to process and communicate their personal narrative. In patients with
severe personality disorder, low mentalizing often starts as soon as they become emo-
tional while recounting their experiences. For example, the clinician may note that
arousal brings with it a higher than typical level of the individual being certain and82 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
insistent about the accuracy of their perspective. This is characteristic of “Inside-Out
Mind ”—psychic equivalence. How is this managed?
The MBT clinician listens sensitively throughout a session for low mentalizing. This
means listening not just to the content of the patient ’s story but also to how they tell their
story. The clinician resists trying to reframe or interpret the content, which is the natural
reaction. Their intervention aims to rekindle effective mentalizing rather than to give low
mentalizing meaning. Without such an intervention, low mentalizing leads to increasing
distress for patients. Their mental pain comes to feel increasingly real. They fail to reorganize
and incorporate earlier experiences in a way that is useful for achieving change. Even distant
events start to have the power of current reality, and traumatic memories can take over.
There are two barriers to intervention. The first is that the event itself is experienced
in low-mentalizing mode and as a result is not fully available for reflection and change.
The second is that the current state of low mentalizing prevents fruitful exploration of
other issues during the session. Therefore the clinician retreats in order to advance —first
taking steps to recover the patient ’s mentalizing, and then revisiting the incident/
narrative for learning purposes. In summary, this involves four steps.
1. Avoid joining with current low mentalizing.
2. Use the MBT Loop (see this chapter: What is an MBT Loop?) to rekindle mentalizing.
3. Revisit the low-mentalized incident in the narrative.
4. Reclaim the narrative within effective mentalizing.
Avoiding Joining with Low Mentalizing
Remember that in low mentalizing the mind is fixed and rigid and not in a state of
conflict. Paradoxically, this is true even if what is being narrated simultaneously holds
diametrically opposing views. In low mentalizing, alternative perspectives are not avail-
able, and therefore it is counterproductive for the clinician to enter into the inconsist-
ency. Intervention at the level of counterarguments does not match the patient ’s mind
state, which is not about debate but rather about a painful and fixed totality. Effective
intervention is difficult because low mentalizing, when painful for the patient, leads to
empathic distress and low mentalizing in the clinician. It becomes challenging for the
clinician to avoid joining with low mentalizing (agreeing or disagreeing) and to maintain
therapeutic equipoise and engage initially with the patient using empathic validation
about their experience. The temptation is to advance counterarguments or to reassure
them that their interpretation of their experience is partial or even incorrect. Yet if the
clinician just passively goes along with and accepts the low mentalizing without question,
the patient can interpret this as confirming their experience and as colluding with their
possibly erroneous construction of their own or others ’attitudes and motivations. To
prevent this situation from arising, the MBT clinician starts an MBT Loop.
What is an MBT Loop?
An MBT Loop is a three-step maneuver. First, the patient and clinician notice and name
the low-mentalizing mode. This will have been discussed in the MBT-I phase; Sarah is
aware of her “Action Mind, ”“Outside-In Mind, ”and“Know and Now Mind, ”and is also
to some extent aware of her “Bubble Mode ”with her son.
Second, the clinician curiously explores the content of the low mentalizing, slowly and
sensitively moving away from detailed direct examination to broader exploration of theThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 83
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
topic, which is more likely to re-establish reflection. Empathy is used extensively in this
context for the purpose of emotion regulation.
Third, once the patient has achieved self-regulation and a sense of agency, the content
and context of the narrative that appears to have triggered the low mentalizing can be re-
explored. Memory work is used to increase the capacity for mentalizing by enhancing
episodic memory with enriched contextual cues to achieve a broader vantage point of the
event and the experience that it generated. The memory work achieves a transformation
of the episode from a singular, impenetrable, and toxic mental experience into a
mentalizing memory narrative with links to other mental experiences explicating the
context of the experience and stimulating improved metacognitive organization.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
Sarah tells the clinician that the Child in Need care support worker was being difficult
during her last visit to check up on Sarah and her son; the support worker “told ”Sarah that
she was not a good mother.
CLINICIAN :How disappointing! You are trying so hard. ( Empathy is being used to regulate emotion. )
How did she come to that idea?
SARAH :She asked about whether I cook nutritious food for him, as she said he looked thin. Of course
I do, and he is not thin anyway. I cook things that he likes, and I said to her “What am I supposed
to cook? ”We had an argument, as she said that I had to cook things that were good for him and
not just give him things that he liked. I asked her if she had any children herself and she would
not answer. Who does she think she is to tell me what to do? I ’m fed up with her.
CLINICIAN :You were pretty direct with her then, and you aredoing your best with Jack. I can see that
you reacted strongly. Sounds like your relationship with her took a turn for the worse? ( An
attempt at slowly and gently broadening. )
SARAH :She doesn ’t like me and has now taken against me and she will write a horrible report. ( The
first attempt at broadening was clearly unsuccessful. )
CLINICIAN :That is a terrible worry for you and feels unfair as you think she is quite wrong about what
she was saying. What was your relationship with her like before this week? ( A second attempt at
slight expansion and diversion away from the current problem, moving to a broader discussion about
their relationship. )
SARAH :That ’s it! It was all just such a shock. She could be helpful about some things. She had some
really good ideas about how to encourage him to get up for school. She didn ’t criticize
me before.
CLINICIAN :So what about this criticism? Was that what you were reacting to? Or was there
something else in it?
SARAH :I felt she was against me and she had no idea and was not recognizing how hard I tried.
Before she seemed to see that I tried really hard and made a lot of effort. I have made a lot of
effort to get Jack to eat, which is why I offer him things he likes. I do make sure that it is nutritious.
I don ’t just give him chips. ( Sarah is now a little more reflective. )
CLINICIAN :So, looking back, she seems to have missed on this occasion how much you try.84 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Now the clinician and Sarah are going to consider whether Sarah was over-reactive or over-
sensitive, or whether she was understandably angry about the support worker ’sl a c ko f
sensitivity and their failure to see all of Sarah ’s efforts in feeding her son.
The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 85
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
86 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 87
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
88 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 89
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Pretend Mode
The onset of pretend mode in clinical sessions is an ominous sign, as it ossifies the
interaction and prevents change. In clinical practice, a patient may be functioning in
pretend mode when (a) they use excessive rationalization and intellectualization, (b)
their narrative feels hard to follow, (c) comments about others, the patient, or the
therapy are bland, “canned, ”and predictable, (d) there is a felt disconnection in the
dialogue between patient and clinician, or (e) explanations of symptoms and personal
relationships seem trite, repetitive, and even take a textbook form. Attributing complex
motives to others without evidence and/or the use of labyrinthine reasoning for motives
without strong links to reality, leaving the listener perplexed about how these can be
justified —a state of hypermentalizing in which there is over-recruitment of cognitive
processing with limited affectively informed experience —describes this state well. It has
also been referred to as “bullshit mode, ”as in “No, surely not —are you are bullshitting90 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
me?”, said with a compassionate twinkle in the eye. Identifying and labeling it —naming
and noting —serves to bring the patient ’s attention to it and expresses the clinician ’s
concern that smoke and mirrors/ “talking the talk but not walking the walk ”may be
happening in the session. Pretend mode can be perspective specific, and so a patient can
move in and out of pretend mode function while they talk about the same issue.
The inevitable result of pretend mode embedded in the patient ’s mental function is
for the clinician to experience a sense of being not quite present or in the same room as
the patient. They find it difficult to engage meaningfully, and the interaction does not
feel subjectively personal. There is a disconnection between patient and clinician, which
grows as the clinician struggles to be able to follow the convoluted inferences of the
patient ’s understanding of others ’motives. The recursive quality of mentalizing of course
lends itself well to pretend mode thinking —“She just thinks that I am concerned that
people think I am X. Well, I will tell you that ’s just plain wrong! ”(wrong that they think
you are X, that you think you are X, that you are concerned about being X, that she
thinks people think something they do not think, that anyone can think of you and X in
the same sentence ...).
Patients in pretend mode are aiming to achieve some kind of balance, talking to
themselves and not to the clinician, although the clinician is needed to maintain the
pretense of communication (hence the term “pretend ”). The clinician ’s mind state has an
illusory link to the patient ’s mind state (another way in which it is pretend). It is an
uncomfortable position for the clinician, so what can they do? There are several
approaches that they can take.
1. Probe and name and note if possible.
2. Increase immediate relational anxiety.
3. Challenge the patient with counterfactuals.
4. Challenge the patient sensitively or more directly with therapeutic “ambush. ”The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 91
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
92 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 93
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
94 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Importantly, the clinician needs to recognize pretend mode, refrain from joining with
it (which is difficult when the content appears insightful and meaningful in terms of
treatment), and get themselves “back in the room, ”feeling real, agentive, and in mental
contact with the patient. Initially, perhaps the clinician probes and asks penetrating
questions about the content of the patient ’s narrative, not to express doubt but to make
clear that they are a real part of the conversation, and the clinician also comments on the
qualities associated with the presentation (e.g., “You seem rather flat as you tell me about
that”). The aim is to say something that is striking —that serves to shatter the illusion of a
monologue masquerading as a conversation.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 95
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
Sarah is talking about her relationship with her son, Jack. The clinician thinks her story
about him is being relayed in pretend mode.
SARAH :You know that Jack is like his father. But like with his father he is just about appearances.
(A helpful warning from Sarah. ) I look after Jack well and I think I have done well with him. If I don ’t
check, if I look away, then it goes pear-shaped. He is dressed well for school, he does all his
homework, the school is pleased with him. None of that is him. It ’s me via him. Know what
I mean?
CLINICIAN :It is great that the school is pleased with him. Tell me how you get him to do his
homework. That is quite something.
SARAH :Oh, I make him sit down and tell him he has to be a good boy for his mum, otherwise she will
be upset. He doesn ’t want to upset me.
CLINICIAN :How not?
SARAH :A boy doesn ’t want to upset his mother, does he? Jack wants to look after his mother. I say
that to him and he agrees.
This conversation has a detached quality. The current probing from the clinician
does not make any discernible difference so, after further probing, the clinician moves to
the second level of trying to dismantle pretend mode, which involves making the
interaction more relationally focused on the current moment. Pretend-mode function
is sensitive to current relational affective experience, as there is a momentary immediacy
of minds and the isolation of the patient ’s mind processes is no longer able to maintain a
level of “quarantine ”that is decoupled from representing other minds. Pressure is placed
on the patient to consider the mind state of the clinician. This can involve making
counterintuitive or “what if? ”interventions to surprise the patient; these are additional
interventions that undermine pretend mode and can make the patient more alert and less
self-contained.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
CLINICIAN :Hmm. But what does a good mother who wants to look after Jack look like?
SARAH :What do you mean? ( Sarah is suddenly alert. )
CLINICIAN :Well, a good boy looks after his mother, and I was wondering what a good mother who
looks after her son looks like.
SARAH :I am a good mother.
CLINICIAN :I know that, and I was thinking about how you work that out and if it would be good for
us to think about it. From my point of view, I realized that I am not so sure about what makes a
good boy and what makes a good mother. I realize that I am putting a bit of pressure on here and
you will worry about what I think about you being a good mother.
SARAH :What do you think?96 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Now the interaction has become more immediate, and at last there are two people in
the room. The patient and the clinician now monitor the levels of anxiety carefully.
Anxiety is inevitably engendered when the bubble of pretend mode is popped and the
patient becomes more aware of their own engagement in “pretend ”therapy and telling
“pretend ”stories to themselves. It is essential that the use of pretend mode is reduced, as
its self-serving nature fails to engender change. Pretend mode keeps things the same and
does not fuel change and development. Therefore if the initial maneuvers do not work,
the clinician has to consider challenging more directly —a kind of therapeutic ambush or
surprise. This intervention works best if it is communicated in a tone of light-hearted
mischief, and even better if it has some shared humor within it. The principle is that the
intervention by the clinician is unexpected and surprises the mind of the patient; it is
outside the normal therapeutic dialogue.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
When Sarah was in pretend mode, the clinician looked out of the window while thinking
about how to intervene.
SARAH :Don ’t look out of the window when I am talking. Listen to me.
CLINICIAN :Oh yes, of course. Sorry. I was trying to think. I am looking out using my eyes and I listen
with my ears. I can multi-task, you know. Do you know why?
SARAH :(with some surprise at the question ) No, I don ’t.
CLINICIAN :Because I am a man. We can do that sort of thing.
SARAH :Hmm.
CLINICIAN :But seriously, as I am a man I can only do it for a short time. At the moment I am trying to
listen and think, which is where my multi-tasking is not working. I really want to think about this
as it is so important.
Sarah was not quite sure whether to be angry or to laugh at the sudden change of
interaction, and it gave time for the clinician to present his state of mind, which Sarah
could no longer ignore. Both conversational partners were then established in the room.
Clinicians understandably worry about using this type of mischievous or direct
challenge to the flow of a session, and indeed it can be a high-risk intervention, albeit
with the major advantage of kick-starting the patient ’s mind or tripping it up with
surprise. The clinician has to be in emotional equipoise, and this intervention cannot be
used out of frustration or anger with a patient. It is effective only if the patient experi-
ences it within the context of a robust therapeutic alliance, and as arising from a
compassionate cognitive empathic perspective.
Mentalizing an Affective Narrative: Creating a Compassionate Story
Patients with BPD commonly discuss and process their personal narratives in low-
mentalizing mode. The task of treatment is to transform the narrative to create a
mentalized version. Mentalizing adds coherence, nuance, accuracy, and continuity to a
narrative by placing the experience in a personal context, enabling learning andThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 97
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
constructive action. This is the point at which the clinician considers the content of
mental states in detail —the“what ”and the “why”mentioned in Chapter 3 . Once severely
low mentalizing has been addressed in the session using the interventions described in
the previous section of this chapter, the MBT clinician is able to focus constructively on
the content of the patient ’s narrative. Understanding the meaning of events —making
links with present anxieties when talking about events from the past, and linking and
placing current problems in a historical narrative —generates a sense of continuity and
coherence that is essential for building psychological health and resilience. The process of
making connections between events and the psychological experience that surrounds
them is “metatherapeutic, ”by which we mean that it builds the competence and capacity
(“mentalizing muscle ”) necessary for managing routine social experience. This model is
depicted in Figure 4.2 .
To create a mentalized narrative, the patient is initially asked to tell their story and to
describe their experience and their affect at the time.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
SARAH :When I was with my boyfriend yesterday, I kept asking him if he loved me more than his last
girlfriend. He told me he did but I was not sure he really meant it.
CLINICIAN :Tell me what made you have doubts.
SARAH :Just the way he was. It was like he didn ’t seem to be listening to me some of the time. Mind
you, he was watching TV. He was watching his [football] team playing.
CLINICIAN :What was it like not being listened to?
SARAH :I felt that I was less important than his football.
The clinician and Sarah chuckle and both say “Probably were! ”(A moment of we-mode
occurs as both clinician and patient access a shared experience looking at the mind state of
Sarah ’s boyfriend. Shared humor can be a potent source of we-mode function .)
CLINICIAN :Something in it caused you trouble, though. Can you describe how it felt?Narrative of
event Experience
at the time Reflection
on self-
experience
at the timeCurrent
feeling 
about self 
informed 
by the 
narrative
Experience
talking to
clinician
about event Reflection
on learning
from the
experience
and the
telling to
the clinicianAlternative
perspectiveFig. 4.2 Mentalizing the
affective narrative (content).98 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
This promotes a vantage point from which Sarah can consider herself as a person to
be thought about, as a mental image constructed in the mental quiet of now, allowing
calm reflection. Building on this mental distance, the clinician asks the patient to
consider their emotions in the “there and then ”and to scrutinize them, examining their
strength and considering their complexity —simple feelings, mixed feelings, ambivalent
feelings, conflicting feelings, multiple feelings, secondary feelings (feelings about feel-
ings), primary feelings (anger), and social emotions (guilt, shame). Elaborating the detail
of feelings can bring greater clarity to the patient about their emotional reactions and
responses, and can initiate a move toward self-identification of the cause of their feelings
(distress or excitement). In the process, a way of acquiring control over emotions is
achieved, along with the opportunity for patients to know themselves and their natural
reactions better. Elaborating on emotions enables elaboration of the interpersonal
contexts that gave rise to them. Mentalizing entails adopting metacognitive positions —
for example, it requires us to take into account our current state and how current
experience can color recollections. Being aware of the potential for such distortion
strengthens the accuracy of self-reflection. Therefore the clinician intervenes to ask the
patient to describe both how they feel now about their experience earlier, and how their
affective experience of telling the story impacted them. All of these maneuvers serve to
increase the stability of mentalizing.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
CLINICIAN :As you are talking about this, what comes into your mind about yourself and your
boyfriend?
SARAH :I start to worry that I am asking him things that are really my anxiety and he just does not
know what I am talking about.
CLINICIAN :What is the anxiety that makes you ask him what he thinks and feels about you so much
of the time? As you imagine yourself, what was going on inside you?
SARAH :It is like I am when I am sitting on my own at home. I start to go into a haze that feels awful
and I don ’t know what I am thinking or feeling. I have to get him to say something about me to
clear the haze.
CLINICIAN :Gosh. What is this haze that comes over you when you are alone?
SARAH :I shouldn ’t be like that, should I? When I talk about it now it makes me think I am pathetic
and should sort myself out.
When exploring narratives with the patient ’s self as a mental image constructed
during the session, one frequent problem is that patients, assuming the projected
perspective of the clinician, become judgmental about themselves, as Sarah has just
done. This is not surprising given what we know about the predominance of negative
constructions in BPD. Self-imagery in these contexts entails little self-understanding,
which is part of the limitations of mentalizing that MBT aims to address. Given the
patient ’s lack of understanding of affects and personal compassion, the clinician ’s role is
to regenerate a more positive self-affective state by enhancing the patient ’s capacity forThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 99
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
self-understanding. The absence of compassion in relation to the self will often trigger
intense negative feelings that threaten mentalizing. It is therefore important for the
clinician to be alert to this possibility, and to intervene immediately to block the patient
from following their self-condemnation. The clinician should counteract it by enhancing
mentalizing that generates self-compassion.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
CLINICIAN :Hang on a minute. You jump to judgment so quickly. You were saying that you can go
into a haze, which is painful and unpleasant. So if you are scared of that, of course you need him
to get you out of it, whether he is watching the match or not. But let ’s go back to see what this
haze is and where it is coming from, and if you can get yourself out of it without help.
If the clinician does not interject at these points of self-judgment, the patient may fall
into fixed and persistent self-criticism that triggers low mentalizing. Even if the response
appears more positive, the clinician is advised to continue to explore the patient ’s past
and current experience in the interpersonal context of the story before moving to a
general appraisal of what the story means to them. Personal meaning making is best
done when the whole event has been underpinned with mentalizing, so that there is
coherence, continuity, and self-compassion within the narrative. Once this has been
achieved, the clinician works toward placing their exploration in the context in which it
is being discussed; the patient is asked to consider the emotional experience as they tell
their narrative to the clinician in an attempt to stimulate some we-mode functioning and
to consider how current emotions can color experiences. When the patient adopts a
third-person perspective on themselves this primes questions about the onlooker ’s (i.e.,
the clinician ’s) reaction to or attitude toward what the patient is reporting about their
life. Social emotions such as shame or a sense of failure relative to some vague imagined
norm might be triggered, or, more positively, perhaps pride in managing something that
hitherto was problematic. These feelings, which will reflect to some extent the state of the
current relationship between the patient and the clinician, are critical as a basis for
establishing relational mentalizing (see this chapter: Relational Mentalizing). Exploration
adds to the complexity and potentially intensifies arousal, risking the loss of effective
mentalizing, but the risk is worth taking in relation to the benefit of gaining improved
understanding of how problematic emotions are processed with others.
In general, mentalizing personal narratives enhances mentalizing competence, initi-
ates a focus on alternative perspectives, generates opportunities to enhance self-
compassion, and counterbalances the predisposition toward negativity.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
The clinician notices that Sarah keeps on glancing at him. From the formulation the
clinician is aware of the need to be alert to an external mentalizing focus, so he immedi-
ately asks about the mental state behind the glances, making no assumptions about what
state of mind they indicate.
CLINICIAN :I am noticing some quick looks at me —what ’s going on in there?100 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
SARAH :I keep thinking you think I am an idiot and just being stupid, or that you think I am
just hopeless.
CLINICIAN :Where is that coming from? I am not sure what you mean. Certainly I was not aware that
I was thinking that about you. I was thinking how you seemed to be putting yourself down again
and how quickly you do that. And this is not when you are in a haze!
SARAH :But I think I am. I am not really sure what I am saying. I have to look at you to tell me what
I am saying is right. I see myself going into a haze when I feel that I am not anyone really and not
sure about myself.
CLINICIAN :That ’s really helpful, Sarah. ( The clinician is quick to reinforce mentalizing. ) What makes you
not so sure about yourself at the moment?
Sarah is now beginning to link her experience with her boyfriend and her experiences
in the present moment with greater continuity. Effective mentalizing enables her to
simultaneously be observed and be part of both of these experiences, able to step back
from them and observe herself observing. She can identify that the discussion of the
events during her session triggered her brief episode of “haze”experience, this time with
the clinician rather than with her partner. The clinician ’s task now is to keep Sarah ’s
reflective mentalizing active in order to consider the link between her loss of a subjective
self, which has created a painful existential crisis (the haze), and her need to find a
teleological solution to her crisis through action (getting her boyfriend to show her that
she is a person by telling her that he loves her).
This stepwise process of stimulating mentalizing, discussed here as a therapeutic
intervention, is actually no more than what might happen in everyday life. Most of us
hold on to our feelings until we can tell someone we trust about them. We cannot fully
reflect on experience without considering it in the presence of someone else. As we tell
our trusted friend about an experience, we monitor (a) the emerging picture of our
experience at the time, (b) our current experience in reflecting on the experience, and (c)
our experience of our trusted friend ’s picture of the event and our reactions to it. These
are interdependent concurrent processes, which effective mentalizing affords. The gen-
eration of perspective on self-experience is in many instances only possible through the
availability of a trusted other whose reaction enables this process of calibrating internal
experience. The disruption of interpersonal trust deprives individuals like Sarah of a
naturally occurring but essential system that we perhaps all need for processing emo-
tionally challenging social experience. We have described this process for infants as
“marked mirroring ”as they acquire an understanding of emotional experience (see
Chapter 2 ). Beyond infancy, marked mirroring is also part of the social process of
deepening self-consciousness and self-understanding. It is the vital gift that social
support provides for individuals. The manner of this mirroring helps us to integrate
our emotional response into a more comprehensive picture of ourselves in which we
recognize our feelings for what they are. It also helps to calibrate the intensity of
our reaction. Was our reaction “normal ”—that is, how one might expect a person to
respond —or was it exaggerated? The friend helps us to reconsider our reaction so that we
learn more about our sensitivities. In the telling we change and even deepen our relation-
ship with the friend who sees things that we did not see. We learn about ourselves.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 101
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Elephants in the Room
During social interactions our automatic mentalizing “antennae ”are constantly alert,
mostly monitoring our reciprocal communications quietly and beneath the surface. They
immediately alert us when we experience inconsistencies —for example, when someone
says that they are in a particular mood but in fact seem to be communicating a different
internal state. We then switch to controlled mentalizing and ask a question: “You say you
are‘fine’but you come across as rather miserable. Are you sure you are OK? ”A firm rebuff
tends to make us step back and we continue on the basis that we can do no more for the
moment. However, it means that the continuing conversation, discussion, and explor-
ation are now distorted, as some of the interaction is now excluded from shared
subjective experience. There is a proscribed subtext while we concentrate on the
dominant narrative.
We all have our working theories about ourselves, and our own ways of presenting
them. We call them personal narratives or our imagined self —a model of who we feel that
we are at any given moment, and why we feel that we are the way we are, based on the
evidence arising from our subjective experience. These narratives tend to shape the way
in which we mentalize ourselves and how we tell people about ourselves —they are a way
of making sense of our actions. For most of us, at any given moment there is one
predominant working theory —that is, the most obvious, straightforward way of describ-
ing ourselves. This is what the patient commonly presents in any therapy session. But we
also have more subdominant narratives; these are the understandings of ourselves that
are more nuanced or complex, and that are hidden from the normal shorthand we might
use to describe ourselves. The dominant narrative is in the foreground, but there may be
a range of other narratives behind it.
Sarah has a dominant narrative: “I need to be admired and liked, and to achieve that
I need to meet all the expectations you have of me. ”The clinician senses that this is true,
but also realizes that there is a subdominant narrative of Sarah being tired of working so
hard to try to please people all the time. This subdominant narrative will be active but
not expressed openly. Unspoken between clinician and patient, the conflict between
Sarah ’s wish to please and her frustration with this role is like an “elephant in the
room ”—nobody explicitly acknowledges that it is there even though it increasingly
interferes with the interaction. The mutual recognition of these subdominant narratives
is a particularly potent way of establishing epistemic trust in therapy, because it brings
with it a shared we-mode interaction. Therefore the MBT clinician makes the “elephant ”
recognizable by moving the automatic/controlled dimension of mentalizing slightly in
the direction of controlled mentalizing, usually by identifying a disjunction within the
therapy process with the aim of making this a subject for scrutiny.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
CLINICIAN :I have noticed just how hard you work to make sure you meet all the expectations that
the people around you have; you know, in your shoes I would just get exhausted trying to meet
every expectation anyone might have of me.
SARAH :You think I should not do it? Do you think this is interfering with my therapy? Do you want
me to stop doing it?102 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
CLINICIAN :That is what I am getting at —my sense is that you are checking me all the time to see if
you are getting the therapy right, and I am saying enough already, what about what Sarah
needs? Isn ’t Sarah tired worrying about what everyone else wants all the time? So I am doing the
opposite, trying to get you to work out what is right for you while you are busy worrying about
me. Maybe we need to think about the possibility that sometimes we find ourselves pushing and
pulling in opposite directions a bit.
In MBT the intervention of identifying the elephant in the room is known as
exploring the affect focus . It is affective because before the subdominant narrative is
identified and named, it generates an emotional experience, a feeling state in the room,
rather than a clear idea; it is focused because it points to the need to specifically target a
current and shared relational space. It is not solely about the patient ’s internal state, as
there is reciprocity in developing the elephant. The clinician and the patient unwittingly
create elephants that loom larger and larger in the room as therapy continues.
Identifying an interactive elephant is important as, if it remains subdominant without
being expressed, it potentially becomes corrosive by constricting self/other mentalizing,
which then cannot be harnessed to develop a more nuanced understanding of ourselves
and our interactions. Compassionately verbalizing the elephant increases epistemic trust
by allowing the patient to “feel felt, ”it stimulates explicit mentalizing of the current
relational processes activated in therapy, and it provides an entry point for exploration of
the patient ’s attachment and relational dynamics. But elephants, although big, may be
surprisingly hard to find when you are looking for one.
Relational Mentalizing
BPD is a relational and attachment disorder. MBT identifies and explores the different
attachment strategies and their activation in many aspects of the patient ’s life. The
relational mentalizing focus has three main components:
1. explicit identification and formulation of the patient ’s attachment strategy during
assessment
2. MBT-I group —psychoeducational input about attachment processes, and
personalizing attachment (e.g., understanding current relationships using the lens of
attachment)
3. recognition and exploration of the complexity of relationship dynamics in individual
and group psychotherapy.
Often, this process has to be built over time. In earlier iterations of MBT, identifica-
tion by the clinician early in treatment of historical patterns of relationships in the
patient ’s life and links between these and the way in which the therapeutic relationship
unfolds were called “transference tracers ”—that is, interventions to indicate the relevance
of looking at the relationship between patient and clinician in order to understand the
patient ’s problems in more detail. To a large extent, this process of setting a framework
for the exploration of relationships is now incorporated into the psychoeducation about
attachment in the MBT-I group (i.e., step 2 in the three-point list).
Relational mentalizing follows the principle of democracy in MBT and is the quint-
essential intervention for activating the we-mode. The interaction between patient andThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 103
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
clinician is jointly created, and exploration of both contributions without prejudice is the
key process. Remember that facilitation of mentalizing is a journey, not a destination.
1. No particular understanding from a historical or current experience is necessary.
2. There is little room for causal interpretation of experience.
3. The answers to the “why”questions are sparse.
4. There is more room for the “how”and the “what ”of interactional process.
All of this is in contrast to the reliance on “genetic, ”past–present transference
interpretation of traditional psychodynamic therapy as a primary intervention [ 11].
We identify a series of steps to be followed when mentalizing the relationship in
MBT. First, the clinician has to be sure that the patient has a mentalizing capacity that is
able to differentiate between mental states of self and other and can contrast them
without excessive diffusion, muddling what is in the clinician ’s mind and what is the
patient ’s mind. Complex interventions such as those related to detail of the patient –
clinician interaction require the patient to be thoughtful and reflective if they are to
further the joint project of nuancing relational understanding constructively. An inef-
fectively mentalizing patient rigidly holds on to understandings and is unlikely to draw
on the richness and nuance of past experience. Ineffective mentalizing is not a productive
basis for imagining different perspectives and actively comparing them with alternatives
that may be distinct in complex and subtle ways. Therefore the first step will always be to
check the current capacity for mentalizing —in both the clinician and the patient —and,
linked to this, the level of anxiety. A robust we-mode can develop only in the context of
stable representation of the participating minds, which are then joined to consider
something else together as one mind, which in this case is their relationship —the
relationship that was created to focus on the shared task of understanding the patient ’s
personal relationships in everyday life.
The next step is for the clinician to validate the feelings expressed by the patient about
the relationship, and to explore those feelings. The danger of the genetic approach to the
relationship (i.e., linking current events to past events and the feelings and beliefs that
they have generated) is that it might unintentionally and implicitly invalidate the
patient ’s current experience. Moving attention from present salient determinants to
putative past ones can feel like disinclination to face up to the challenges of the present.
In MBT, the clinician spends considerable time using the not-knowing stance, exploring
and clarifying what the patient says they are experiencing.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
The clinician told Sarah that he needed to rearrange her next appointment as he was
going to be away at their usual time the following week. Sarah said that they could sort it
out at the end of the session. However, at the end of the session the clinician forgot to
rearrange the appointment, but he remembered a few minutes later. So he ran to the
hospital gate and caught up with Sarah. As he called out to her she turned and said “Nearly
forgot, did you? ”He apologized, and they rearranged the next session. They discussed this
event during the next session.
SARAH :I thought that therapy had ended last week as it was obvious you did not want me.
CLINICIAN :I am so sorry that I forgot to fix a time at the end of the session. I am not sure what
happened. What did you take from it?104 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
SARAH :It confirmed what I already knew. That this is just another place where I am not wanted. If
you had wanted to carry on seeing me, you would have remembered.
CLINICIAN :It is quite a thing, isn ’t it, when something so important doesn ’t happen and we could
have been left with a real problem of being in touch to rearrange. I can quite see that. Where are
you now with those feelings?
SARAH :Well, I think that you felt guilty and that was why you ran after me, and that you thought you
should not have been like that so were trying to make up for it by catching me at the gate.
CLINICIAN :You are right in a way. I felt a bit anxious, too, as it is not like me and I am not sure
what happened.
SARAH :You were out of breath.
CLINICIAN :When I caught up with you, you made a comment that sounded as if you had
remembered but somehow did not feel able to remind me.
SARAH :Yes, I did. I thought “He does not want me so I won ’t remind him. I just won ’t go back. When
he phones, I won ’t answer. ”That ’s what I thought. “He doesn ’t care so it doesn ’t matter to him
that he doesn ’t know what has happened to me. ”
CLINICIAN :So it was kind of a test and I failed spectacularly. I walked into it.
SARAH :I am not sure, but I couldn ’t tell you.
CLINICIAN :So at the moment we are both here thinking about being wanted or not. My forgetfulness
has set it all off as it showed that I was not looking after you with enough care.
SARAH :I don ’t want to be here sitting with someone who doesn ’t want me here. It makes it hard to
think about anything else really. Do you feel guilty about it?
CLINICIAN :It was me that forgot and I am still not sure why I only remembered after the end of the
session. So I do, a bit.
SARAH :Only a bit?
CLINICIAN :What is it like for you sitting here with a therapist who feels “a bit ”guilty?
SARAH :I quite like it ( hiding a smile ).
CLINICIAN :It seems there is a tiny pleasure in imagining a guilty therapist?
SARAH :Not sure.
CLINICIAN :You smiled as you said that and I thought maybe there is a tiny compensation in being
able to watch me suffer a little when you feel I was quite cruel to you.
SARAH :Yes, I do. That is why I was finding it a bit funny I suppose. I like the idea that you should suffer a
bit. You would not know where I was or what I was doing. I knew you would have to worry about me a
bit. It would be your fault. I couldn ’t remind you. To be honest, I was a bit disappointed that you
caught up with me at the hospital gate. But at least you had to run as I was walking quite fast.
As a result of this exploration, with some validation and sharing of responsibility for
the problem, the third step will be generated. As the events that created the feelings in theThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 105
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
relationship are identified, and the behaviors to which the thoughts or feelings are tied
are made explicit, sometimes in painful detail, the contribution of the clinician to these
feelings and thoughts will become apparent. It takes two hands to make a clapping
sound. The unpacking of the clinician ’s experience and the modeling of ownership for
actions and the mental states driving those actions is the journey to recovery on which
patient and clinician join. Equity is key —for there to be progress, the clinician needs to
accept their contribution to the patient ’s experience. The core element of intersubjectiv-
ity is mutual recognition. Sarah gradually becomes able to recognize the clinician ’s
subjectivity, developing the capacity for attunement and tolerance of difference. Here
she is struggling to separate from the subverting of her needs to those of the clinician.
This is a fight for recognition in which the outcome is an embryonic ability to recognize
another person ’s subjectivity at the same time as retaining awareness of her own. Her
journey of differentiation is not just separation, but the continual breakdown and repair
of mutuality in the world beyond the self. Her sense of the clinician comes and goes, as
does her awareness of “I-mode. ”The ability to hold on to both simultaneously is
challenging but also increasingly accessible as the session moves on. For Sarah, the
breakdown and reconstruction of the interpersonal world is an endless experience of
aggression and the generation of a shared sense of being with the clinician.
We now know that even infant attachment relationships are driven by interaction
structures with characteristic patterns of mutual regulation , which the infant comes to
remember and expect. Patterns of mutual regulation between mother and infant in the
early months of life illustrating matching and derailed exchanges, based on microanalyses
of film and videotape, demonstrate a dynamic process of reciprocal adjustments .T h e
irreducible unit of a dyadic system of what is represented is an emergent dyadic phenom-
enon that cannot be described on the basis of either partner alone. We distinguish this
from the non-productive complementarity characteristic of situations that were common
earlier in the therapy, when the clinician and the patient were locked into a relationship in
which each assumed a role in a predictable well-choreographed dance, each nudging the
other to perform what they themselves needed (i.e., Sarah needing a figure who rejects her,
and the clinician needing the patient to enact her sense of helplessness and frustration).
The patient ’s experience of their interaction with the clinician is likely to be based on
a partially accurate perception of the interaction, even if only a small component of it. It
is often the case that the clinician has been drawn into the relationship and acted in some
way that is consistent with the patient ’s perception of them. It may be easy to attribute
this to the patient, but to do so would be misleading. In order to create the mutual
awareness of the we-mode, it is often better for the clinician to share with the patient
their contribution to the patient ’s experience as an inexplicable, involuntary action for
which they accept responsibility, rather than identifying it as caused by —or, worse still,
the imaginings of or a distortion by —the patient. The clinician does this with Sarah by
suggesting that forgetting to reschedule her appointment was his responsibility and it is
currently unexplained. To do this well requires authenticity. Drawing attention to the
clinician ’s contribution may be particularly significant in that it demonstrates to the
patient that it is possible to accept responsibility for involuntary acts, and that such acts
do not invalidate the general attitude the clinician is trying to convey. Only after this
consideration of the clinician ’s contribution can distortions be explored.
The capacity to maintain internal awareness —to sustain the tension of keeping one ’s
own mental perspective while simultaneously representing and being attuned to that of106 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
someone else —forms the basis of what we call the we-mode. This is the coordinating
function of genuine mentalizing. The sustained tension of difference in perspectives
helps to create an intersubjective co-creation; the MBT clinician offers an alternative to
the asymmetric complementarity of knower and known, giver and given to. The experi-
ence of the adoption of common purpose is critical. The we-mode is achieved when the
clinician –patient unit is the shared object of experience and is evaluated principally from
the perspective of the likely success of therapy experienced as a collaborative activity.
Clinically, the concept of a co-created intersubjective joint intentionality helps to eluci-
date stepping beyond the complementarity in impasses and enactments, and suggests
how recognition is restored through mutual surrender by the patient and clinician
of what we call the I-mode for the we-mode. This is the essence of MBT —and perhaps
of every psychotherapy.
The we-mode is an entry point and not the end of the process. It makes the fourth
step possible, which is collaboration in arriving at an alternative perspective. Mentalizing
alternative perspectives about the patient –clinician relationship must be done in the
same spirit of mutual involvement as any other form of mentalizing. The metaphor that
we often use in training is that the clinician should imagine sitting side by side with the
patient, rather than opposite them. The patient and the clinician sit together, looking at
the patient ’s thoughts and feelings and, where possible, both adopting an inquisitive
stance in relation to them. Using these insights, the clinician works to present a fresh
view, and the final step is to carefully monitor the patient ’s reaction as well as the
clinician ’s own response.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
CLINICIAN :Get me to how you knew you could not just remind me directly by saying “What about my
appointment for next week? ”
SARAH :It has something to do with me accepting that I feel so not wanted and not being allowed to
demand attention for myself.
CLINICIAN :Allowed?
SARAH :Yes. I think people don ’t want me when I am here. It is when I am nothere that they think
about me and worry about me, and realize that they quite liked me.
CLINICIAN :Gosh! You have to be absent to be liked? That ’s hard!
SARAH :I never told you, but I used to want to be in a film that people would watch. They would have
to concentrate on me, to think about me, and would have to leave themselves out of it so all their
attention was on me. If you had forgotten and I had not answered my phone I would imagine you
thinking about me and wanting me to be here.
CLINICIAN :Oh I see, if you were not there then I would not have the real you but this image of a
person who is missing who does not have to do anything because she is just an image.
SARAH :I can ’t bear seeing disappointment on people ’s faces when I feel I am letting them down.
CLINICIAN :It seems to me that you do so much to avoid the situation of having to face the possibility
of people being disappointed with you.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 107
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
SARAH :When I see that I just want to die. I couldn ’t risk asking you for my appointment in case you
looked disappointed that you would not have your own time without me.
The clinician and Sarah are now beginning to work out an alternative perspective that
is centered around elaborating the wider meaning of the experience of the clinician
forgetting to rearrange the session. It is complex and nuanced, it is deeply relational, and
it is clearly to do with the ineffectively mentalized experience of interpreting the
clinician ’s reaction. Whatever the childhood or other determinants of Sarah ’s inability
to ask for an appointment, the conversation between her and the clinician is fully
engaging both of their capacities to mentalize.
We suggest that these steps are taken in sequence, and we talk about mentalizing the
relationship orrelational mentalizing to distinguish the process from interpretation ,w h i c h
is an effective method of providing patients with insight. Relational mentalizing is a
shorthand term for encouraging the patient and the clinician to think about the relation-
ship they are in at the current moment (i.e., the patient –clinician relationship). The aim of
this is to focus the patient ’s attention on another mind —that of the clinician —and to assist
the patient in (a) engaging with the thoughts and feelings of the clinician in a mutual
process that enables them to contrast their own perception of themselves with how they are
perceived by another, and (b) elaborating within the context of relationships the personal
meaning of what has happened. This requires the we-mode to be active: “the two of us are
trying to work out what happened here and what it means. ”
Although the clinician might point to similarities in patterns of relationships within
the therapy, in the patient ’s childhood, or currently outside the therapy, the aim of doing
so is notto provide the patient with an explanation (insight) that they might be able to
use to control their behavior. Far more simply, these similarities are raised as just a
puzzling phenomenon that requires thought and contemplation, as part of the general
inquisitive stance that aims to facilitate the recovery of mentalizing within affective
relational states, which is the overall aim of treatment.
It is assumed that in successful interventions the patient and the clinician are working
simultaneously at an implicit relational level to create increasingly collaborative forms of
dialogue. This includes careful attention to the particular state of the other ’s intersub-
jective experience, open acceptance of a broad range of emotional experiences, active
scaffolding to more inclusive levels of dialogue, and engaged struggle and intersubjective
negotiation through periods when the other ’s mind is changing and new ways of relating
are needed. Here MBT takes a leap away from content-bound understanding of specific
relational experience to understanding that “the medium is the message ”—that is,
engaging in the process of understanding may be the common factor across the almost
innumerable theoretical positions that therapeutic approaches can take.
Counter-Relational Mentalizing
Mentalizing the relationship cannot be discussed without briefly considering the counter-
relationship. Counter-relational mentalizing by definition links to the clinician ’ss e l f -
awareness, and often relies on the affective components of mentalizing. It also links to
the principle of mental democracy described in Chapter 3 . We contrast counter-relational108 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
responsiveness with “being ordinary. ”Some clinicians tend to default to a state of self-
reference in which they consider most of what they experience in therapy as being relevant
to the patient. This default mode needs to be resisted, and clinicians need to be mindful of
the fact that their own mental states might unduly color their understanding of the
patient ’s mental states, and that they tend to equate these without adequate foundation.
In an earlier publication, we suggested that clinicians must “quarantine ”their feelings
(Allen et al. [ 12], p. 47). How this “quarantining ”is achieved informs the technical
approach in MBT to counter-relational mentalizing, defined as those experiences (both
affective and cognitive) that the clinician has in sessions that might further develop an
understanding of mental processes.
All aspects of therapeutic activity are determined in part by the clinician ’sp e r s o n a l
psychology. The traditional approaches to counteracting undue influence —by which clin-
icians reduce their own subjective biases by being modest, remaining open to surprise,
seeing themselves as students who learn from their patients, and focusing on the patient ’s
inner psychic reality —are valuable up to a point, but even in combination they are not
sufficient. MBT rejects the notion of objectivity in a therapeutic setting, and demands
humility from the clinician to accept the inevitable subjectivity of technique. It should be
unnecessary for MBT clinicians to attempt notto be passionately (and irrationally) involved
in their everyday clinical work. In any case, it is hopeless to ask clinicians to do this. Counter-
relational experience, expressed verbally by the clinician as part of the democratic process of
equality of mental-state scrutiny, is an important aspect of MBT, but when such an experi-
ence is expressed it must be marked as an aspect of the clinician ’s state of mind. It is not
attributed to the patient, even though it may well be a reaction to the patient.
In difficult situations when there is a need to express counter-responses that are
complex, we suggest the following simple procedure.
1. Anticipate the reaction of the patient.
2. Express your recognition that they might feel in a particular way regarding what you
are about to say.
3. Express it with sensitivity.
4. Monitor the patient ’s reaction carefully.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
CLINICIAN :I would like to bring up something that is quite difficult for me but I think is important for
the therapy. I worry that you will think I am saying something about you being a bad mother, and
I do not mean to do that. I wanted to bring up my worry that you look after Jack ’s physical needs
very well but that you can suddenly become very emotional and lose your temper with him.
When I try to bring it up you change the subject, and I realize that I am becoming a bit impatient
with you about it, as I think that it may be important.
SARAH :I don ’t really want to talk about that sort of thing. The social support worker asks me about it
all the time and she thinks I am a bad mother.
CLINICIAN :Yes, I appreciate that it can sound like that when any of us bring it up, but it interferes
somewhat with working on your care for him. Perhaps both of us need to talk about our
impatience! What about yours with Jack?The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 109
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
110 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 111
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Clinical Example: Stanley
Expressing more problematic responses to patients requires skill and sensitivity. Here is an
example involving another client, Stanley, who is intimidating and who triggers anxiety in
the clinician:
CLINICIAN :(when the patient seems calm ) Stanley, I have to talk about our meetings and what
happens in them. I don ’t mean to be critical of how you behave, but when you sit forward and
shout at me I become quite anxious. When I am like that I cannot listen carefully and think
properly. I don ’t know what I do to make you do that. Can we review what happens? The main
thought I have is that perhaps you have a sense that I don ’t understand something.112 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Counter-relational experience can be intensely felt during treatment of people with a
diagnosis of personality disorder, with clinicians struggling with sometimes strong
feelings of rage, hatred, hurt, anxiety, and helplessness. Patients seem able to identify
clinicians ’sensitive spots and sometimes will even focus on them as they try to control
their own emotional processes during a session. As previously mentioned, the task of the
clinician is to let the patient know that what they do and say evokes a state of mind in the
clinician and, similarly, that what the clinician does and says stimulates mental processes
in the patient. Patients need to consider in their own mind the effects that they have on
others ’minds, rather than ignore those effects or maintain that they are of no conse-
quence. It is the task of the clinician to ensure that this work is done as part of exercising
recognition of others ’mental states and increasing the capacity for empathy with others.
To do this work it is essential that the clinician is supported in maintaining their own
mentalizing and in recognizing and reflecting on counter-relational feelings and their
origins. Supervision is an integral part of achieving this.
MBT Supervision
Supervision is integral to the effective delivery of MBT.*Clinicians need support from
expert supervisors for a range of reasons (see Box 4.5 ), and supervisors need to keep
these all in mind and work with an MBT team to decide which areas need the most focus
at any particular time. This section of this chapter will be mostly concerned with the
importance of the clinical aspects of supervision. However, it is important to bear in
mind that clinicians work within a system and a service pathway, so supervisors need to
take into account the milieu and the levels of mentalizing within the organization in
which their supervisees are working.
Implementation and Clinical Structures
Implementation of MBT needs to fit well with an organization, and the organization
needs to fit with and support the delivery of MBT. Organizations need to have a clear
strategy of developing treatment pathways for people with personality disorder; an MBT
team that leads the development of a treatment pathway within a wider mental health
system may be responsible for ensuring that the service is organized to fit well with the
overall service, so as to maximize the effective and efficient delivery of treatment in an
arrangement that offers patients rapid access to assessment. The supervisor supports all
of these tasks and helps to create a functioning MBT team with members who haveBox 4.5 Supervision tasks.
/C15Implementation of an MBT service within an organization.
/C15Development of clinical structures and materials that support the delivery of MBT.
/C15Ensuring that mentalizing theory links to clinical practice.
/C15Supporting the learning and refining of clinical skills.
/C15Maintaining mentalizing of the supervisee clinician(s).
*Full details of MBT supervision can be found in A Quality Manual for MBT (www.annafreud.org/
media/1217/a-quality-manual-for-mbt-edited-april-23rd-2014-2.pdf )The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 113
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
defined roles, with a range of MBT skills —perhaps some new trainees and some at
experienced practitioner level. A within-team peer-support process is encouraged along
with an overall team approach as part of the basis for implementation.
The evidence suggests that patient outcomes are maximized if MBT is delivered
within an organization that supports the MBT program, and by a mentalizing team
composed of staff who are able to model the process in their service milieu, particularly
in the way allof the staff interact with patients, from the receptionist to the lead
clinicians to the managers [ 13]. A supervisor acts as a sounding board and advisor to
ensure that the staff work together, forming a mentalizing team who show respect for
each other. To some extent, a supervisor anticipates the difficulties of implementation
and helps the MBT leads and supervisees to think through the effects that the context in
which MBT is being implemented might have on them as well as on their patients.
The supervision system as part of a wider MBT system is not modeled on an expert
coming in from “outside. ”The supervisor may be a skilled practitioner who is a senior
member of the treatment team, or a member of another MBT team working in a different
treatment program. The former allows the integration of all aspects of treatment within the
team, whereas the latter facilitates new ideas and promotes cross-fertilization.
Supervisor Materials for MBT Supervision
A wide range of materials can be used in supervision. Supervisors should have access to
manuals, chapters, and research on MBT, and these materials should be made available
for supervisees, to inform discussions on implementation and clinical practice. Planning
of MBT supervision sessions is essential, with supervision perhaps taking the form of a
time-limited course with supervision meetings covering topics agreed in advance, each
with reading material and a requirement for supervisees to present clinical material
related to the topic in question. This format is used for new trainees who are developing
practitioner-level skills. Essential topics that should be covered over an 18-month period
of supervision are listed in Box 4.6 .
Box 4.6 Essential topics for supervisees who are starting to deliver individual and
group MBT.
/C15Assessment and formulation.
/C15Not-knowing stance.
/C15Starting therapy.
/C15Mentalizing the counter-relationship —initial sessions.
/C15Recognizing ineffective mentalizing.
/C15Intervention for pretend mode.
/C15Intervention for psychic equivalence.
/C15Intervention for teleological mode.
/C15Mentalizing process —managing arousal, contrary moves, parking.
/C15Mentalizing process —acknowledging positive mentalizing.
/C15Affect focus —clarification, affect identification, mentalizing functional analysis of
an event.
/C15Affect focus —“elephant in the room, ”group interventions.
/C15Mentalizing the relationship.
/C15Mentalizing the counter-relationship in group sessions.114 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Ensuring That Mentalizing Theory Is Linked to Clinical Practice
Joining theory to clinical practice fosters an increasingly coherent model in the mind of
clinicians, and allows them to make decisions according to clear principles during
psychotherapy sessions, which by their nature are infinitely variable. Separation of the
ideas of theoreticians, the findings from academic research, and clinical practice bedevils
psychological interventions in general, with clinicians often wondering what an idea
embedded in empirical research —for example, about social interaction —means in terms
of how they might change their practice. MBT is, and hopefully always will be, a joint
endeavor between those working in empirical research and those engaged in delivering
treatments to patients. A crucial part of these links is the work of a supervisor, making
reading an important part of supervision and encouraging discussion about the clinical
ramifications of new ideas. For example, if it is correct that epistemic trust (see
Chapter 2 ) is the door that needs to be opened for change to occur, how does contem-
porary MBT practice concentrate on the opening of this door? Are some current
interventions uniquely capable of doing so? Are there any interventions that could be
used more, or any that can be used less? The supervisor becomes the conductor of
discussion, stimulating debate and ideas about the translation of research into practice,
rather than acting as an expert who delivers answers.
Supporting the Learning and Refining of Clinical Skills
The supervisor can use a variety of methods to support the development and skillful
delivery of MBT interventions.
First, they can model the playful, not-knowing stance used in MBT during inter-
actions within supervision as a method to explore the supervisee ’s clinical work, seeing it
from the supervisee ’s perspective of their own experience as well as elaborating their
understanding of the patient ’s experience. This process demonstrates that the clinical
difficulties are explored from the perspective of the supervisee, which, along with an
emphasis on the positive aspects of the supervisee ’s work, serves as an ostensive cue
system that opens up a channel of trust between supervisor and supervisee. This is
necessary before more complex problems, such as counter-relational responses, can
be addressed.
Second, once mutual trust has been established between the supervisor and super-
visee, video recordings of clinical sessions can become the focus for supervision. Actual
clinical moments in treatment are used as a trigger for discussing what intervention to
use and how best to deliver it.
Third, role play can be used to practice some of the clinical difficulties encountered in
the supervisee ’s work —with the supervisor playing the role of the clinician, and the
supervisee playing the part of the patient. This not only demonstrates the delivery of
interventions but also allows the supervisee to subjectively feel the impact of the
intervention, which may give them a sense of the patient ’s experience.
Fourth, the supervisor can use the development and review of formulations as a
means of working directly with the supervisee on their clinical reflections on treatment
and practicing how they might share them with the patient. Developing them together
(rather than the supervisor assessing the supervisee ’s creation) generates joint attention
by the supervisor and supervisee on a central component of MBT, and also models a
mentalizing approach.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 115
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Finally, the supervisee needs to be supported in using their counter-relationship with
the patient. The supervisor may need to recognize and carefully highlight the clinician ’s
sensitivities, particularly when these interfere with the treatment process. All clinicians
have strengths and weaknesses, and supervision is the place for these to be discussed, at
least to the extent that they can be addressed in relation to the treatment of a particular
patient. Some clinicians are more skillful with certain patients and less so with others,
who activate their mentalizing weak spots. Being able to recognize one ’s own interper-
sonal strengths and mentalizing weak spots is essential in order to avoid inadvertently
causing harm to patients (e.g., by engaging with them in a way that is dominated by the
clinician ’s own imbalances in mentalizing). A critical patient might trigger defensive self-
protection in some clinicians more readily than in others; if that self-protection takes the
form of retaliation from which the clinician cannot easily recover, the therapeutic
relationship will become increasingly problematic. Clinicians ’characteristics can inter-
fere with outcomes in psychotherapy with patients with personality problems. Some
patient –clinician interactions cause considerable problems, which will need to be
addressed in supervision. For example, patients with ASPD tend to elicit in the clinician
feelings of being criticized and mistreated, whereas when working with patients with
BPD the clinician ’s counter-responsiveness often includes feelings of helpless inad-
equacy, or of one ’s mind being overwhelmed, disorganized, and unable to think. The
opposite may also occur, with the clinician feeling “special ”and becoming over-involved
[14]. In these and other circumstances in which the patient –clinician interaction inter-
feres with the effective delivery of treatment, the management of the clinician ’s prob-
lematic responsiveness has to be the subject of supervision. The focus is, of course, on
maintaining the mentalizing of the clinician.
Maintaining the Mentalizing of the Clinician
Clinicians have been found to have significantly more negative responses toward patients
with BPD and to experience them as less responsive and more withdrawn than patients
with major depressive disorder [ 15]. When this is combined with the hostility and/or
high dependency that clinicians experience as being directed toward them in the context
of suicide attempts and self-harm (see this chapter: Adaptations of the MBT Model: The
“At-Risk ”Patient), and their anxiety about feeling responsible for keeping the patient
alive, clinicians can feel useless, undermined, and persistently anxious. These feelings
inevitably lead to a rapid loss of mentalizing within sessions. Non-mentalizing in either
the clinician or the patient leads to non-mentalizing in the other —which is, of course, the
complete opposite of the primary aim of MBT. If this situation is arising in sessions, the
clinician and their supervisor need to work to address the problem.
Working in supervision on the counter-relational response of the clinician is part of
the support required to help clinicians to maintain their own mentalizing to the extent
that they can reflect on themselves and the patient during a session; this helps them to
escape from being trapped in a maladaptive process that is preventing change. This
aspect of supervision is discussed in Chapter 8 in the context of work with patients with
avoidant personality disorder, during which boredom may become a problem. Self-
reflection by clinicians —seeing themselves in the context of the treatment process —
results in them feeling more confident and less likely to be reactive and defensive when
under fire. They will be able to see their inappropriate responsiveness and use it to116 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
inform treatment, instead of covering it up or, worse still, engaging in an interaction that
is harmful to the patient. The supervisor is both part of a support system around the
clinician, and part of a wider MBT system that protects the implementation of MBT at
patient level. The supervisor also has a comparable ring of protection through regular
discussions about their supervisory work with other supervisors as part of their own
continuing professional development.
Supervision is a skill in itself —it cannot be assumed that someone will automatically
become a supervisor in MBT simply because they have been practicing as a clinician for a
certain period of time and have seen a particular number of patients in treatment. More
important are the supervisory skills of an individual and their ability to impart know-
ledge and to stimulate a mentalizing process within supervision itself. A relaxed, facilita-
tive, and generous interpersonal style and a flexibility of mind that is consistent with
being an accomplished MBT practitioner may be the most important characteristics of a
good supervisor.
Adaptations of the MBT Model: The “At-Risk ”Patient
This section outlines how the MBT clinician intervenes to help patients to reduce risky
behaviors such as suicide attempts, self-harm, and violence, all of which can imperil
treatment as well as the patient ’s and clinician ’s physical safety. The guidelines apply in
the following circumstances:
1. at the beginning of treatment, when assessing a patient who has a history of suicide
and self-harm or violent behaviors
2. after a suicide attempt, serious self-harm, or an act of violence has occurred
3. when the patient threatens an imminent suicide attempt or self-harm or violence
4. if suicidal ideation is persistent
5. if other recurrent self-destructive action or risk-taking behavior occurs that threatens
life or treatment.
Any self-destructive event must be taken seriously, even if at first sight it seems to be
of limited risk to the patient or others. Right from the start it is important that the
clinician is alert to factors that suggest a change in risk, and that they monitor their own
reactions to risk (see Box 4.7 ).
Box 4.7 Warning signs of a change in risk.
Warning signs include:
/C15an increase in statements and thoughts about suicide
/C15anxiety and depressive symptoms
/C15uncontrolled emotion
/C15sleeplessness
/C15a change in alcohol or drug use
/C15recent loss events, including failure of treatment or discharge from support due to
breaking of a contract
/C15social withdrawal
/C15interpersonal conflict in close relationships
/C15planning a method of suicide and “tying up ”personal matters.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 117
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Understanding Suicide Attempts, Self-Harm, and Violence: A Summary
The clinician needs to keep in mind a mentalizing framework to scaffold their work with
people who are a risk to themselves or others. This topic is also discussed in Chapter 18 .
Recognizing that suicide attempts and other actions result from a cascade of mental
collapse is key. The generic MBT intervention process applies to all self-destructive and
violent behaviors and other harmful risk-taking actions, such as drug or alcohol misuse
(in the rest of this chapter we shall refer to these collectively as “actions ”). The mentaliz-
ing understanding of these actions is summarized in Figure 4.3 .
Even verbalizing “Ia ms u i c i d a l ”or“I have thoughts about killing myself ”indicates that a
mental escape procedure has been activated. A subsequent action itself means that the escape
procedure has been ineffective and the state of mind has become increasingly painful and
threatening to self-coherence and self-existence. Actions such as suicide attempts, self-harm,
and violence are the result of a disorganized and painful mind state. They are an end productBox 4.7 (cont. )
Clinical Top Tips
/C15Beware of low mentalizing in the clinician, and becoming “inoculated ”against taking
risk seriously, often due to its regularity (e.g., frequent self-harm becomes “acceptable, ”
small overdoses become “another one of those actions ”).
/C15Beware of compassion fatigue, in which the clinician stops caring.
Current
“insurmountable” 
mental challengesDisruption of
mentalizingPSYCHIC
EQUIVALENCEBecoming
adultRejectionExcessive
demand for
excellence
Adverse
parentingHistory of
physical
maltreatmentActivation of
attachment system
Non-contingent
response 
Stress reaction
(fight/flight)The
disorganized
self  
Self-harm/violence
to restabilize
disorganized selfPRETEND
MODE
TELEOLOGICAL
SOLUTIONSChild
sexual
abuse
Fig. 4.3 Understanding how loss of mentalizing can lead to high-risk behavior.118 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
rather than the problem that is creating pain. It is far too easy for clinicians to become
focused on the thoughts or actions themselves because they are anxious and frightened
about the level of risk. This results in a failure to explore the mental circumstances and
interpersonal contexts that lead to the patient ’s self-destructive thoughts.
Pathway to Destructive Action
Earlier vulnerabilities, whether genetic or environmental —and of course most usually
both—sensitize an individual to current stressors, which are experienced as insurmountable
problems to which the patient has limited resilience. Stress reactions, anxieties, and painful
mental states automatically trigger the attachment system, which in turn activates a range of
responses, including seeking proximity to an attachment figure. The patient will try to get
support from a partner, friends, or (mental) healthcare services, only to find that their
experience of the response they receive lacks adequate contingency and fails to decrease their
desperation. Further panic ensues as this “mismatch ”represents a further threat —that of
isolation. With increased emotional arousal, mentalizing is disrupted, leading to experiences
being processed ineffectively —either being exaggerated and intensified through psychic
equivalence, or being denied and split off through pretend mode. This makes any affective
and cognitive experience increasingly acute and painful because the mind loses the capacity
to differentiate reality from inner experience. Doubt is lost and certainty of belief dominates.
Only action can then change mental processing, and teleological solutions are required.
Teleological Mode/Outside-In Mind and Actions
A patient who experiences a failure of effective mentalizing and falls into the teleological
mode fails to believe claims made by others about their own subjective states —for
example, that they are concerned about the patient. The patient finds the articulated
mental states of others credible only if they are accompanied by action: “I know you care
if I live or die if you act in relation to my risky behaviors .”To this extent, during threats of
self-harm and suicide a patient may be stabilized through the action of the clinician —for
example, the clinician might express care by visiting the patient at home, contacting a
crisis system on their behalf, or offering to see the patient more often while the risk is
high. In these circumstances the interaction between the patient and the clinician might
become organized around threats of suicide or self-harm that lock the patient, clinician,
and service together in an endless cycle of action and reciprocal action, which manages
the immediate risk but fails to change the underlying problem that has led to the threat.
This is not a conscious, manipulative interaction on the part of these patients. It is a
system for survival that follows from their loss of mentalizing and the acute need for
stabilization of their sense of self through action, generating teleological experience
(creating observable outcomes) for themselves and socially.
Function of Self-Harm
Narrative reviews of published studies have highlighted that affect regulation is the most
frequently reported function of non-suicidal self-harm, followed by self-punishment and
interpersonal influence (i.e., communicating distress, influencing others, and/or seeking
support). Intrapersonal functions such as emotion regulation, avoidance of aversive
affect, or self-punishment may therefore have to be explored with all patients. In
addition, commentators discuss the disturbance to the sense of self (e.g., dissociation)
that is frequent in people who harm themselves, and the stabilizing effects of action onThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 119
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
the sense of self. The concept of the alien self (which is elaborated in Chapters 2 ,14,
and18) is useful for understanding this in more detail.
Cutting, burning, or otherwise injuring oneself reduces anxiety, prevents dissoci-
ation, and clarifies mental states. From the MBT clinical perspective, the purported
function identified by the patient ’s narrative description is not central. We assume a
final common pathway —the loss of mentalizing function. The aim of interventions is to
ensure that mentalizing is stabilized both acutely and in the long term.
Clinical Intervention Process
Clinically, in MBT there is a series of interventions to be made when addressing self-
harm, suicide attempts, and other associated self-destructive or socially destructive
behaviors. These are outlined in Box 4.8 .
Here we shall provide an illustrative clinical example of the intervention process with
Sarah, going through the intervention step by step.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
Sarah was admitted to the psychiatric ward because she was thought to be at risk after the
child protection team had expressed concerns about her ability to care emotionally for her
son. At the time of admission she was not actively suicidal, but had fleeting suicidal
thoughts. The following day she cut her wrist. She was taken to the emergency depart-
ment to have her wounds sutured.Box 4.8 Summary of the clinical intervention process for high-risk events.
1. Establish shared responsibility (agreement).
2. Identify the level of current risk —safety planning (fact finding).
3. Rewind from the current event back in time to a point when the patient ’s mental
experience of self-destructive thinking was absent. (Rewind in time and reflect on what
was then from the perspective of what is now, and prevent the patient from falling into
non-mentalizing modes.)
4. Explore the context and mental experience of wellness/wholeness/absence of threat
when the threat of self-harm is absent (exploration of positive and manageable mind
states).
5. Micro-slice toward the mental-state changes that lead to thoughts/feelings about self-
harm (mentalizing functional analysis).
a. Focus on affect and contextualizing emotions.
b. Manage mind states.
c. Identify the core domain of the problem —interpersonal and affective.
d. Establish a dominant theme.
e. Respect the subdominant theme.
6. Identify strategies for managing mental turmoil using focus and a not-knowing stance
(generating patient autonomy/agency).
7. If required, use the “elephant in the room ”(described earlier in this chapter) to identify
relational factors that interfere with effective exploration of self-harm events (working
with the “we-mode ”/”us”process).120 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The interviewing clinician elicited the following story. Early in the evening on the day
after her admission to the psychiatric ward, Sarah approached the nurses ’station saying
that she needed to talk to someone. The nurse responded in a friendly way, pointing out
that she was currently doing the medication round but that as soon as she had finished
she would come straight to Sarah ’s room. Sarah responded angrily, saying “I need to talk to
someone now, not later. ”The nurse, now somewhat testily, reiterated her offer to come to
Sarah ’s room a little later, and again pointed out that she was currently occupied with
another task. Sarah, now clearly furious, stomped out and returned to her room. Shortly
afterwards, she smashed a cup and cut her wrist while screaming “I want to die. ”
Establishing Shared Responsibility
The clinician cannot assume full responsibility for a patient ’s actions. In the initial phase
of MBT, an agreement defining the extent of the clinician ’s responsibility and the
patient ’s responsibility is documented in the crisis plan.
Clinical Example: Possible Response from the Clinician
You and I have to work on reducing and stopping this dangerous behavior. We need to
agree that whenever you have suicidal thoughts —and certainly if you do try to harm
yourself —we look at it in detail, however painful that might be. We cannot ignore it as it
will be difficult to work together on your problems with the danger of death hanging over
us both. Can we talk about this for a moment so that we both have some understanding of
each other ’s views? Then we can work on what happens and who does what if you get into
a dangerous state of mind.
The joint agreement of immediate clinical aims early in treatment will need to specify
reducing self-harm and suicide attempts and any other destructive behaviors that are
likely to interfere with treatment.
Identifying the Level of Current Risk: Safety Planning
All MBT clinicians who are treating people with BPD are expected to be familiar with
safety planning and risk assessment [ 16]. Certainly it is necessary to establish the facts
about self-destructive actions. Question the patient about events that occurred before,
during, and after the action, remembering that:
/C15many serious suicide attempts and instances of self-harm by patients with BPD occur
in the context of interpersonal conflicts and emotional turmoil
/C15negative interpersonal events predict non-suicidal self-injury.
Some of the factors that need to be considered are summarized in Box 4.9 .
Box 4.9 Enquiries about self-harm and other problematic actions.
This is a process of fact finding.
Before the Event
/C15Were there obvious interpersonal or other precipitants, such as an argument with the
patient ’s partner?The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 121
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)The immediate interpersonal precipitant of Sarah ’s action was her interaction with the
nurse. She had asked to talk and, in her view, been rebuffed. She stated that the nurse did
not want to listen to her: “If she had, I would have talked to her .”The MBT clinician
recognizes this as a teleological understanding of mind states. A person ’s willingness to
listen is only experienced as credible if it is accompanied by fairly immediate action. Sarah
experienced the second rebuff as a rejection, interpreting the nurse ’s slight impatience
as“hostile, ”“ ‘stigmatizing, ”and “an attack. ”At this point, Sarah could not process her
accumulated painful mental states (her original urgent need for assistance with down-
regulation, her frustration, her sense of rejection, feeling picked on and being attacked,Box 4.9 (cont. )
/C15Where were they? Had they gone to a remote place?
/C15Was the action planned or impulsive? Many acts by people with BPD are impulsive,
occurring without obvious pre-planning or worry about the consequences. However,
on careful exploration there are indicators, which were imperceptible to the patient at
the time, that can be used in the future as early warning signs of self-harm or other
destructive actions.
/C15Had the patient been stockpiling tablets?
/C15Did the patient organize their affairs and write a suicide note? In this case there was
some pre-planning, indicating a more serious wish to die.
/C15Were there other factors that reduced personal control, such as use of alcohol
or drugs?
The Event Itself
/C15What was the lethality of the event and what method of self-harm was involved?
/C15Was it violent toward the self (e.g., hanging, self-stabbing)?
/C15Was the patient alone, or did the event occur in the context of a row with a partner/
family member?
/C15Did the patient think that their self-harm would kill them?
/C15What did they do straight after the self-harm?
Following the Event
/C15Did the patient call anyone? How did they get help? Who found them?
/C15How did they feel when help arrived?
/C15How does the patient feel about the attempt now? Do they regret it? Do they wish that
it had worked?
/C15Does the patient still feel suicidal?
/C15What is the patient ’s current mood? Are they depressed?
/C15If the patient was to go home today, have purposeful daily activities covering the
following week been agreed, including who the patient might meet with?
Clinical Top Tip
Identifying the current level of risk requires “fact finding. ”There is no need to take a not-
knowing stance about mental states for this part of the process —you are interested in the
facts rather than the mental states.122 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
and the overwhelming righteous indignation of victimhood) and she panicked. She
returned to her room. She denied even thinking about self-harm before and had not
planned anything. Her next action was impulsive —on seeing the teacup in the room she
smashed it and stabbed the shard into her hand and cut her wrist. She did not call for help,
and had shut her door when she returned to her room. After cutting herself she did
indicate that there was a problem by shouting that she wanted to die. The clinician
assesses this narrative as showing impulsivity and strong interpersonal components —for
example, in the proximal interaction with the nurse. The risk was judged to be low to
moderate because no pre-planning was evident. There is ongoing risk related to impulsiv-
ity with interpersonal triggers unless Sarah ’s sensitivities to rejection in interpersonal
situations are addressed and her mentalizing becomes more stable in the identified
circumstances.
Importantly, the MBT clinician now has hints from the fact-finding process about
what went wrong. Sarah is in distress, she feels afraid and unsafe, she feels unable to
regulate these feelings internally, and this triggers her attachment system and proximity
seeking. She reaches out to the nurse as someone with whom she may be able to down-
regulate herself. Not only is the nurse ’s response non-contingent, but also her refusal to
immediately attend to Sarah ’s need is unacceptable. She needs help now and not after the
nurse has finished giving out the medication. Her mind is in teleological mode, and any
response other than obvious action that comprehensively meets her need will not signal
relief. This results in increased anxiety, which hyperactivates her attachment processes.
Sarah becomes more demanding, and when her need is further frustrated she tries to
shut her mind down by leaving the interpersonal interaction. Attachment has failed in its
primary purpose of eliciting a reciprocal response of caregiving that might soothe and
alleviate Sarah ’s fear. The second, more demanding, request comes from a different
place —one of angry hurt and deep frustration. Sarah nudges the nurse into a familiar
complementary role of irritated denial of access. Her own role is feeling the victim of
stigma and of incompetence, now filled to the brim with righteous grief. Intense feelings
trigger further intense feelings. Her head feels as if it will burst. She escapes from the
painful encounter only to be left alone with overwhelmingly intense feelings and
confusing ideas. She does not want to die, she does not even want to hurt herself —she
just wants it all to stop. The cup acquires perceptual salience. She smashes it against the
wall but that dramatic act upsets her even more. She grabs the sharpest piece she can find
and uses it to cut into her hand and wrist. She does not really know why she did that. The
cry“I want to die ”is something of an afterthought. But the act of shouting and cutting
achieved its function. She feels a little calmer.
Rewinding from the Current Event in Time: Focusing on Mental States before the Event
Having gathered all the details of the event, the clinician “rewinds ”to a time when the
patient was able to identify their internal states and manage their emotions (managing
mentalizing process). The most common error is for the clinician not to rewind far
enough back in time and to get stuck on the immediate precipitant(s), which in this case
appears at first sight to be the interaction with the nurse. However, by the time Sarah
decided to go and speak to the nurse it is likely that her mentalizing was already
compromised.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 123
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
This MBT intervention seeks the point of vulnerability for the patient in terms of
when their anxiety starts to undermine their mentalizing. This can be identified only by
finding a point when their mentalizing was still stable and then tracing forward to a point
at which it is apparent to the patient that their mentalizing is becoming vulnerable, but
which is well before their mind enters the uncontrollable cascade of ineffective mentaliz-
ing that will inevitably result in action. The aim of this “detective work ”is to work with
the patient on finding solutions or workarounds to this process.
In this example, as always, there are various time points to which the clinician can
rewind. It is not essential to get the right time point every time, as it is easy to rewind
further if questioning reveals that the patient was in a state of poor mentalizing at the
time that the clinician is focusing on. It is important for the clinician to remember that
they are exploring the patient ’spast mental states from the perspective of
current mentalizing.
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
CLINICIAN :Tell me what you wanted to talk to the nurse about.
SARAH :It doesn ’t matter now. That was then. It has gone. I needed to talk then and not now
(dismissive and defensive).
CLINICIAN :Yes, I understand that, but it was very important then, so perhaps it can tell us something
about what you sometimes need help thinking about. (The clinician is maintaining the focus.)
SARAH :All I wanted to know was if my son ’s dad was bringing him to visit as I had not heard from
him. I knew he was supposed to be visiting, but he usually rings me and he had not contacted me
and I thought he might have talked to the nurses. Of course, you know he wants to take my son
away from me because I am supposed to be insane.
The clinician has taken Sarah back to what was in her mind when she felt the urge to
talk to the nurse. However, her answer suggests that her mentalizing was lowered at the
time. The immediacy and tone of her response now suggest that her mentalizing is
possibly reduced currently —she explains her desire to talk to the nurse as seeking
information and believes, perhaps with good reason, that her former partner “wants to
take my son away from me .”So it is obvious that the visit has complexity and significance
beyond a mere hospital visit. The clinician is not surprised that the threat of her son
being taken away from her could have powerful effects on Sarah ’s mentalizing, and
obviously this will need to be talked about in some detail if she is to be protected from
similar experiences in the future.
Clinical Example: Possible Alternative Responses from the Clinician
Tell me what you were thinking about in relation to your son ’s father not being in touch
with you. I can imagine it would have got you quite worried given what is going on
between the two of you in relation to custody issues. ( The clinician rewinds to focus on a
more general component of the problem .)124 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
How had the day been before you started to think like this about your son and his
father? ( The clinician rewinds to a point at which Sarah might have been calm and
thoughtful .)
How have things been recently between you and your son ’s father, before you came
into hospital? ( The clinician starts an MBT Loop by rewinding to focus on the overall
relationship with Sarah ’s son ’s father. )
In general, we suggest that the clinician should rewind to a point when the patient
was calm and functioning.
Exploring the Context and Mental Experience of Wellness/Wholeness/Absence of Threat
Once the patient ’s level of arousal has been lowered and they are able to access earlier
stable mental states, the clinician starts to explore the troubling context and linked
mental content. For example, if the rewind in time has focused around Sarah ’s current
relationship with her son ’s father, the clinician can begin to explore this relationship:
“What is your relationship with him like at the moment? ”
At this point, the clinician starts by asking about times when the relationship was going
relatively well, rather than focusing on the acute negative and highly problematic inter-
action. To establish stable mentalizing, the clinician affirms the possibility of a positive
relational process and validates Sarah ’s role in maintaining the relationship. As she defaults
to talking about the problems, he then gently keeps her focused initially on relatively
neutral aspects of the current relationship by asking factual questions and preventing the
conversation from immediately deteriorating into a panicked and confused tirade about
her son being taken into care or her losing custody. As is inevitable, notwithstanding the
clinician ’s care, genuine worries about problems with the coordination of shared care with
the father are emerging. The clinician takes a not-knowing stance at this point, stimulating
Sarah to reflect on the details of interactions, all the time trying to enhance her mentaliz-
ing. Listening to the narrative, the clinician cuts across non-mentalizing generalizations,
moralistic reasoning filled with “shoulds ”and“oughts, ”black-and-white thinking, auto-
matic thoughts, and ungrounded assumptions, steers her away from unjustified inferences
based on appearances, and introduces cognition to accompany intense affect, all the while
discussing his thoughts and feelings but ignoring her own reactions, her feelings about her
son, and her anxieties about losing custody. In other words, the clinician uses what he
knows about the polarized nature of mentalizing to create a narrative that is balanced
across the dimensions, to ensure that mentalizing is retained even though such an intensely
emotional issue is being discussed. The clinician encourages openness and flexibility while
also persistently refusing to let Sarah off the topic that triggered the collapse of mentalizing
and her episode of self-harm. When she claims that it is no longer relevant, he suggests that
nevertheless, just as a favor to him, they should spend another few minutes talking about it.
Micro-slicing Toward the Mental-State Changes that Lead to Thoughts/Feelings
of Self-Harm (Mentalizing Functional Analysis)
The mentalizing functional analysis is concerned with the patient ’s changing state of
mind and its interdependent interaction with external circumstances. This is not simply
a discussion about environmental sensitivities and triggers [ 17]. It is a discussion about
changes in subjective experience as an event unfolds. The clinician takes the processThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 125
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
seriously and controls the speed of exploration —the slower and more detailed the better.
Let us imagine that we are the supervisors of Sarah ’s clinician, who would like to work
through the events that led to the episode of self-harm.
Clinical Example: MBT Advice to Guide Sarah ’s Clinician for the Session Following
the Episode
Take Sarah back to what was in her mind before she even thought about whether her son
and his father were coming to visit. What was in her mind when she began thinking about
the visit? Was she looking forward to them coming, albeit concerned about the visit, given
her concerns about the father ’s long-term motives, or was she anxious, and if so, about
what? Try to get an impression of what happened to her thoughts and feelings as she
approached the point when she felt she needed to ask for support. Try to make a
judgment —is her thinking muddled, excessively fixed and certain, judgmental, or black-
and-white? What was the moment in her thinking when the quality turned from reasoned
and reasonable to dominated by affect and hard to understand? You are trying to follow
experiences associated with the lowering of mentalizing, a reduction in the ability to
integrate feelings and cognitions, and an inability to maintain a barrier between what is
just a thought and what is physical reality. Identify the dominant and subdominant
(“elephant in the room ”) emotions that contribute to this. It can be helpful to establish
the mode(s) of mind states that is brought forward when mentalizing generates too much
anxiety. Is it psychic equivalence, teleological mode, pretend mode, or a combination of
two or more of these modes? What is the emotional impact of ineffective mentalizing?
Does it help to re-equilibrate emotion and solidify Sarah ’s sense of self? Or (more likely)
does it add to her troubles by generating even more emotion and confusing her thinking
about who she is and what she hopes for?
Keep going back and forth in time. Establish some early points at which Sarah was still
in control, and focus more intently around these points. Might she have questioned her
own experience at that time? How might she have managed her anxiety better? Can you
help her with some pointers if this kind of situation were to happen again? Don ’t forget
that it is the process that is helpful here, not the point at which you arrive. Next time it will
be different, but you hope that what she learns is the way you encouraged her to observe
her thoughts, even if the specific thoughts will be about something completely different
next time. Do not get hung up on small and subtle differences in feelings and attitudes, or
about consistency or inconsistency with what you heard on other occasions. Follow the
patient ’s words for emotion and make certain that you know what experiences those
words refer to. Make sure that the discourse you are having is about thoughts and feelings
and that they feel real to you (i.e., not pretend) at all times.
Focusing on Affect and Contextualizing Emotions
Emotions interfere with decision making based on mentalizing, and thus interfere with
effective responsiveness to stressful situations. In people with BPD, this can have tragic
consequences. It is necessary for the clinician to attend to the emotional state that the
patient experiences as their thoughts become increasingly self-destructive. Is it anger or
is it a reaction to something that is more complex, such as being misunderstood or
feeling uncared for? Is it helplessness and disappointment after trying so hard to improve
a relationship? As discussed earlier in this chapter, being able to label and organize
feelings is part of basic mentalizing. It is important to validate the patient ’s initial
attempt to label their feelings and try to focus on them while looking for126 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
misunderstandings in communication and interference with effective responses. The
clinician should not become side-tracked by emotions that are reactions to responses
from others arising from the patient ’s attempt to communicate their distress.
It is important to identify the initial feelings in the trajectory to the loss of mentaliz-
ing, because later feelings tend to be reactive to the initial states. Although later feelings
may be felt more strongly due to the loss of ability to mentalize them, they are often less
central to the patient ’s triggering sensitivities.
The clinician manages the conversation by expanding the frame within which
emotional states are explored, following the pathway outlined earlier (see this chapter:
Mentalizing an Affective Narrative: Creating a Compassionate Story).
Managing Mind States
Most patients in treatment will have gained some understanding of mind states from
completing the MBT-I phase. Sarah needs to become sensitive to her changing mind states,
and in particular to be aware of the emergence of psychic equivalence and teleological
mode, both of which become common during the onset of self-harming thoughts and
behaviors. As we described earlier, it is important to locate the beginnings of psychic
equivalence and the context in which the patient begins to realize that their thoughts are
becoming rigid and certain. For many patients, it is possible to label these mind states and
help them to rewind themselves once they realize that they are experiencing them. Once
psychic equivalence has been recognized by the patient, label it —for example, as “Boom
Brain Time, ”“Inside-Out Mind, ”“Know and Now Mind, ”or some other shorthand term.
When teleological mode is recognized, label it too —for example, as “Action Mind ”or
“Outside-In Mind. ”This may help the patient to become more sensitive to the onset of
these states and to take steps to stop them before they become overwhelming.
Identifying the Core Domain of the Problem: Interpersonal and Affective
As we mentioned earlier, evidence shows that many suicide attempts and self-harm
episodes in people with BPD occur in interpersonal contexts, against a background of
high emotion. Negative interpersonal events predict self-harm. It is not an easy task to
differentiate dysfunctions of interpersonal interaction from problems with emotion
regulation, as both tend to occur in an interpersonal context and they exacerbate each
other. High emotion distorts the way in which a person reads social meaning and how
they understand others ’mind states, resulting in interpersonal discord and confusion.
Interpersonal discord in turn stimulates problematic intrapersonal emotions and mis-
perceptions of others ’motives. Nevertheless, the MBT clinician uses a not-knowing
stance to explore the interaction between interpersonal function and emotion
dysregulation, trying (but never successfully) to identify which is the “chicken ”and
which is the “egg,”and which came first. Why does the clinician do this? Again we
emphasize that it is not the destination but the journey that matters. Exploring both of
these domains strengthens metacognitive capacity. From an MBT perspective, the diffi-
culty lies in translating this exploratory journey into practical therapeutic action. The
most common error is to assume that the problem is related solely to a dysfunction of
managing emotion, and then logically following this by trying to implement emotional
management strategies apart from the interpersonal context in which emotional
dysregulation occurs. If decontextualized from the patient ’s interpersonal sensitivities,
emotional regulation will not achieve improved quality of life. InterpersonalThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 127
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
vulnerabilities enable the exploration of relational and attachment processes that are
central to the problems of people with BPD, and that trigger emotional dysregulation. It
is likely that for individuals with BPD, biological (e.g., genetic) factors and the social
environment make such triggering more frequent and more severe, but addressing the
response without looking at the antecedent is likely to have a very limited impact.
Establishing a Dominant Theme
Clinical Example: Sarah (continued)
Sarah experiences tensions in her relationship with the father of her son, which have an impact
on her relationship with her son and perhaps also disrupt (or at least create complications in)
her relationships with others, including the chi ld protection team. In the review of the self-harm
narrative, an interactional problem emerges with the nurse whom Sarah approached for
support. All of these interpersonal contexts tri gger attachment strategies, which are embedded
in the way that Sarah habitually reacts to interpe rsonal stress. The clinician explores all of the
relationships to see whether there are obvious overlaps in what Sarah appears to be sensitive to.
It turns out that Sarah felt “overlooked, ”“ignored, ”and “not listened to ”by people in all of these
contexts. No one had been thoughtful enough to d iscuss the hospital visit with her, the child
protection team was expressing concerns but fai ling to recognize her increasing efforts to look
after her son, and the nurse did not recognize her distress and “ignored ”her request to talk. This
allowed the dominant theme for exploration to be about her vulnerability to people leaving her
out of any interaction. Sarah quickly felt pushe d aside, and her sensitivity to rejection meant
that she reacted strongly to defend her sense of s e l f .R e a c t i n gw h e ni nt e l e o l o g i c a lm o d el e a d s
to insistence and a demanding presentation that people feel unable to appreciate —hence the
conflict with the nurse, who certainly could not see that, at that moment, validation of Sarah ’s
anxiety was a matter of life and death for her. Wh en rebuffed, Sarah could not understand the
nurse ’s motivation; rather, she felt so confused that she withdrew, but at that point she could
only retain a subjective sense of se lf-existence through self-harm.
The clinician modifies the formulation, having identified a pattern that substantiates
and clarifies the interactional cycle. Both clinician and patient then focus on aspects of
the cycle as a dominant theme of their sessions.
Respecting the Subdominant Theme
There are always subdominant themes and subdominant emotions that need to be
identified and respected in any exploration of problems. This was discussed earlier (see
this chapter: Elephants in the Room). Subdominant emotions are often those that are on
the periphery of the basic dominant emotion. Subdominant themes are part of a wider
integration of information —for example, “I am hurt (dominant emotion) and constantly
feel hurt by others, but within all of this is a (subdominant) sense that I want to be close to
others but I feel I fail .”The clinician tries to work with both the dominant theme and the
subdominant process implicated in the self-harm/suicidal event.
Identifying Strategies for Tolerating and Managing Mental Turmoil Using the Not-
Knowing Stance
In MBT, clinicians do not know how the patient “should ”have reacted or “could ”have
reacted differently to the personal and emotional stressors. However, they are aware that128 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
suicidal thoughts, suicidal acts, non-suicidal self-injury, and other destructive actions
represent a failure of psychological resilience when managing stress. The clinician
considers how the patient might react differently to stress, but continues to show concern
that the issue is how sensitivities and vulnerabilities are managed. The patient is reactive
rather than proactive, so finding solutions to the reactivity is expedient. The aim in MBT
is to increase early awareness of mental stress and for the patient to become sensitive to
and able to proactively reduce (down-regulate) their level of anxiety using an improved
understanding of the mental states and functions.
If the patient asks “What should I have done? ”then the MBT clinician responds with
the answer “That is a great question. I don ’t know, so let ’s look at that. What sorts of things
come to your mind? ”If the patient is unable to say much, the clinician can stimulate the
conversation: “What about standing back from it and having time to think about it rather
than dropping straight into Boom Brain? Could you ask yourself a question, for example,
as it is happening, and if so what sort of question? ”
The clinician does not give specific solutions but supports the patient to consider
alternative perspectives. Encouraging patients to be compassionate toward themselves
rather than self-condemning is important. This can help them to find active ways of
retrieving balance when their mind stops functioning. The clinician models coping, but
is never a “super-competent ”model. The principle of equity dictates that the clinician
admits to the same need for self-compassion in relation to their own mentalizing failures.
Other Useful MBT Principles for Addressing Risky Behavior
Throughout the focus on self-harm, it is important that the clinician continues to follow
the principles that underpin MBT (see Chapter 3 ).
/C15Maintain a not-knowing stance when exploring themes.
/C15See things from the patient ’s perspective.
/C15Validate the patient ’s emotional discomfort using marked and
contingent responsiveness.
/C15Join with mentalizing; do not join with non-mentalizing.
/C15Use affect focus and clinician counter-responsiveness to identify the effects of
suicidality and other risk behaviors on therapy.
/C15Do not take over the patient ’s mentalizing by telling them what is in their mind or
what they feel.
/C15Avoid using your high mentalizing to manage the patient ’s low mentalizing.
What To Do if the Patient Does Not Want to Talk about Suicide Attempts
and Self-Harm Events
There are occasions when patients will not want to talk about self-destructive acts. In this
case the clinician can do a number of things while remembering the imperative to avoid
becoming coercive (see Figure 4.4 ).
1. Reconsider the contract made at the beginning of treatment in which addressing self-
harm has been agreed if it was part of the patient ’s symptoms and behaviors
associated with BPD. The contract needs to be discussed.
2. Address the difficulty of talking about the action rather than talking about the
circumstances of the event itself, recognizing that talking can cause the patient to feelThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 129
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
shame, and that they might even begin to relive the events in psychic equivalence.
The patient and the clinician then need to manage their anxiety levels carefully.
3. Use an affect focus (the “elephant in the room ”) to identify the difficulty manifested
between the patient and the clinician as a result of not talking about the action. This
leaves the clinician worrying about the patient ’s level of risk and unable to
concentrate on the topics the patient talks about, while the patient is sensitized to the
clinician wanting to raise the question of self-harm; this will distort the interaction
between them. This “elephant in the room ”can be identified and discussed. As a
result, the immediate toxicity of talking about the act of self-harm may be reduced.
4. Explore the consequences of the action and question the effectiveness of the behavior
even if the outcome was apparently positive in terms of the “real”world —for
example, the patient felt better after self-harming. Self-destructive behavior is an
ineffective way to manage emotional distress within certain interpersonal contexts.
Clinical Example: Further Example of Mentalizing Functional Analysis
Sarah ’s boyfriend announced that he and his friends were heading off to a football match.
This was despite his and Sarah ’s earlier agreement that they were going to visit friends
together. He said that he had been offered a ticket to the match and he wanted to take up
the opportunity. Soon after he had left with his friends, Sarah cut herself. Her experience of
being alone and his choice of others over her produced an unbearable stress that in turn led
to a breakdown in mentalizing. The initial announcement by the boyfriend is an attachment
loss—a loss of anticipated physical and emotional “togetherness. ”Initially, Sarah felt that his
choosing to go to the football match rather than join her and her friends meant that he did
not love her. Although this is understandable, the problem was not the thought, but the factSelf-harm/
suicidality
Violence 
Collaborative
agreement to
explore
Rewind to point
of mentalizingMentalizing
functional
analysisNo agreement to
explore
Counter-
relationship 
presentationAffect focus the
shared problem
“Elephant in the
room” Explore difficulty
of talking about
events
Psychic equivalence
Restore mentalizing
Fig. 4.4 Intervention algorithm for exploration of impulsive behavior.130 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
that the thought began to take on all the characteristics of reality due to her vulnerability to
ineffective mentalizing —in this instance, psychic equivalence. Her thought became a fact
with certainty, and her boyfriend ’s absence was additional proof that he did not love her.
Further development of this idea led her to more rigid schematic thinking in which she
“knew ”he was really out on a date with someone else. This inevitably produced more
intolerable feelings, which she could no longer manage. Her only option, or rather the only
possibility she could think of, was to cut herself. This self-destructive act made her relax, but
unfortunately it also produced feelings of shame. When her boyfriend returned, he became
angry when he noticed her bandaged wrist. This perpetuated Sarah ’s cycle of self-criticism.
By working through these patterns of rapidly changing mental states in a wide range
of circumstances the patient gradually learns that feelings do not simply spontaneously
arise. Rather, they are created by interactions with others, and personal interpretation is a
part of those interactions. Understanding and representing the process as it is happening
through the mentalizing functional analysis allows mentalizing to be maintained and the
consequences of mentalizing failure to be explored and reflected on.
The emphasis needs to be on feeling states as part of an overall mental state, and not
solely on cognitive states or antecedent triggers. Thus the mentalizing functional analysis is
more about how the context interacts with the feelings and mental state of the patient
(“What was going on in your mind at the time? ”). It has components of (a) metacognition, (b)
first-order mentalizing ( what I think X thinks or feels ), (c) personal second-order
mentalizing ( what X thinks I am thinking and feeling ), and (d) vicarious mentalizing ( what
Y can teach me about what X is thinking ). In particular, the clinician looks out for communi-
cation difficulties and oversensitivity, which lead to difficulties in managing feelings of
rejection, abandonment, and humiliation, or, conversely, powerful feelings of love, desire,
and need, which lead to a flood of affect overwhelming the mind and destabilizing the
patient ’s subjective experience of self. Remember that, within the context of a collapse of
mentalizing, patients with BPD experience feelings at the level of psychic equivalence. Thus
“feeling bad ”becomes “Ia mb a d . ”The clinician ’s interventions must reflect a sense that they
understand this and are not underestimating the power of the patient ’s experience.
The conscious determinants of the self-harm are explored initially, without trying to
second-guess more complex psychological reasons. During this exploration, the patient ’s
explanation should be questioned if it is schematic and formulaic, because these are non-
mentalizing phenomena that will prevent the development of a more robust mental
buffer to future emotional experiences that might result in self-harm. The patient ’s
action (e.g., self-harm, suicide attempt) should not be interpreted in terms of their
personal history, the putative unconscious motivations, or their possible manipulative
intent in the “heat of the moment ”—this will alienate the patient. Only later will the
clinician be able to build up evidence for underlying vulnerabilities and sensitivities of
which the patient is only vaguely aware, whether these are unconscious determinants or
current events to which they are sensitized by their past.
Clinical Example: Sarah ’s Reaction to Feeling Abandoned
Sarah talked about an episode of self-harm the previous day, glossing over what had
happened and insisting that it was unimportant.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 131
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
CLINICIAN :Tell me a bit more about what happened.
SARAH :There is nothing more to say really. I cut myself.
CLINICIAN :Let’s go back and tell me when you first began to feel something was wrong. ( The clinician
rewinds the focus to an earlier time point. )
SARAH :I don ’t know really.
CLINICIAN :Bear with me —can you remember what you felt, for example yesterday or even before
then? ( The clinician is trying to identify a context or a time when the patient was aware of feeling
OK.)
SARAH :No. I was OK yesterday and I think it was when I got home in the evening. I arranged to see
two of my friends and we went for a drink as I said, and it was only when I got home after that
I began to feel miserable.
CLINICIAN :So you were aware that you were miserable at that point. It sounds like something might
have occurred during the evening. Tell me about the evening, starting with how you felt before
you went out.
The session continued in this way, with the clinician insisting on exploring the detail of the
miserable affect along with the positive enjoyment of being with her friends. It turned out
that Sarah had felt abandoned (a feeling that she experienced before the misery) by her
two friends when they had gone off to the toilet together and left her alone for what she
felt was an excessive length of time.
SARAH :I felt so hurt ( a further affect complicating the internal state of the patient at that time ) that
I nearly cut myself then with my knife, but I scratched myself with my fingernails to get a bit of
blood out instead. Then I got the idea that I should just get up and go so that when they came
back they would not know where I was. ( The motive of revenge appears to have been stimulated by
the severe scratching. Only with a mentalizing mind can the patient have feelings of revenge, which
require self and other representation, and hence her revenge fantasy occurs after she has scratched
herself. ) But just as I was about to leave they came back.
CLINICIAN :And?
SARAH :I didn ’t say anything at all. What ’s the point? They had already spent ages together.
CLINICIAN :Drawing blood is a strong reaction to them being in the toilet for a long time. What were
you thinking and what was the hurt about? ( The clinician is trying to focus on the strength of the
reaction —the problem is not so much the feeling of being left alone when Sarah ’s friends go off to
the toilet, but rather the reaction to the feeling, which is excessive and inappropriate, and is probably
based on an experience of psychic equivalence .)
SARAH :They always exclude me. ( The use of words like “always ”that have a totality and absolute
component commonly implies non-mentalizing. )
CLINICIAN :So you felt excluded and hurt, and didn ’t know what to do about how you felt ( empathic
and validating statement ). Scratching yourself made you a bit clearer, and I can understand how
you could become momentarily vengeful to get back at them, although you then became
miserable later. I guess that you felt that cutting was the only way you could make things feel
better at that point.132 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The clinician is focusing on the affective relief produced by cutting, and is also hinting at a
stabilizing effect of the action —it brings back the patient ’s mind at the point at which it
was lost. Cutting and other actions are ways of reinstating a mentalizing mind. However,
there is a danger here of the clinician overstating their own understanding and going
beyond the patient ’s mentalizing capacity.
SARAH :It always clears how I feel and then I can get on with things again. I was OK with them until
we left the pub and I was able to watch TV for a time.
CLINICIAN :But you cut yourself again.
SARAH :Soon after I got home, I felt awful again and so really wanted to do it that time. I used a razor.
CLINICIAN :Can you say what was going on then?
SARAH :Don ’t know.
Here Sarah is struggling to reflect more on what led her to self-harm. The clinician can
empathize with this at this point:
CLINICIAN :It’s difficult to grasp what it was like then, especially if things are OK now ( empathic
statement ).
SARAH :I can ’t remember. I was just alone. I went to bed after that.
CLINICIAN :Tell me more about the awful feeling before you used your razor.
SARAH :I just felt that the evening had been ruined and that every time I try to enjoy myself
something goes wrong. I was then on my own again.
CLINICIAN :In this case what has gone wrong is that you felt excited about seeing your friends and
then were more sensitive to being left out. This seems to have returned when you were alone at
home and you didn ’t know how to manage it. We need to go back to consider how you manage
your feelings of being left out.
SARAH :Hmm.
At this point the clinician decides that Sarah does not feel able to reflect more on
what has been happening, and so the conversation moves on to other topics. However,
later in the session the clinician assesses that Sarah is mentalizing more robustly, at a
time when she is talking about her sensitivity to being let down. Therefore he brings her
back to the experiences that led to her episode of self-harm, bringing her attention to the
need to be alert to such experiences so that she can begin to manage the emotions either
by redirecting them or by using interpersonal interaction more constructively to reduce
her urge to self-harm.
Summary: Working with At-Risk Patients
Targeting risky behaviors in MBT requires a concentrated focus by the clinician and the
patient on the mentalizing vulnerabilities that lead to the patient ’s dangerous actions.
This may require the clinician to put compassionate pressure on the patient to explore
the events in painful detail, as they naturally may avoid mental states associated with theThe Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 133
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
distress that is elicited during the discussion. A treatment impasse will result if the
clinician is in a constant state of anxiety about the patient ’s safety. Therefore the matter
has to be addressed, and working with high-risk events is another example of how the
MBT clinician may have to impose their own needs on the clinical process, while of
course taking into account the patient ’s sensitivities.
Concluding Remarks
Clinicians who maintain the structure of MBT and follow the principles outlined at the
beginning of this chapter will have a good chance of engaging patients in treatment.
Dropout from treatment is low in MBT. Sarah, whose case we have followed throughout
this chapter, engaged with treatment and was willing to join an MBT group. Chapter 5
describes her entry into the group.
References
1. Smits ML, Luyten P, Feenstra DJ et al.
Trauma and outcomes of mentalization-
based therapy for individuals with
borderline personality disorder. Am
J Psychother 2022; 75:1 2–20.
2. Bateman A, Fonagy P. Impact of clinical
severity on outcomes of mentalisation-
based treatment for borderline
personality disorder. Br J Psychiatry 2013;
203: 221 –7.
3. Smits ML, Feenstra DJ, Eeren HV et al.
Day hospital versus intensive out-patient
mentalisation-based treatment for
borderline personality disorder:
multicentre randomised clinical trial. Br
J Psychiatry 2020; 216:7 9–84.
4. Bateman A, Constantinou MP, Fonagy P,
Holzer S. Eight-year prospective follow-
up of mentalization-based treatment
versus structured clinical management for
people with borderline personality
disorder. Personal Disord 2021; 12: 291 –9.
5. Miller CE, Townsend ML, Grenyer BFS.
Understanding chronic feelings of
emptiness in borderline personality
disorder: a qualitative study. Borderline
Personal Disord Emot Dysregul 2021; 8:
24.
6. Winnicott DW. Ego distortion in terms of
true and false self. In: The Maturational
Process and the Facilitating Environment .
New York, NY: International Universities
Press, 1965; 140 –52.7. Smith M, South S. Romantic attachment
style and borderline personality
pathology: a meta-analysis. Clin Psychol
Rev2020; 75: 101781.
8. Grove P, Smith E. A framework for MBT
formulations: the narrative formulation
and MBT passport. J Contemp Psychother
2022: 52: 199 –206.
9. Bateman A, Fonagy P. Mentalization-
Based Treatment for Personality
Disorders: A Practical Guide . Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2016.
10. Bateman A, Unruh B, Fonagy P.
Individual therapy techniques. In:
Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds. Handbook of
Mentalizing in Mental Health Practice ,
2nd ed. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association Publishing, 2019;
103–15.
11. Bateman A, Fonagy P. The use of
transference in dynamic psychotherapy.
Am J Psychiatry 2007; 164: 680.
12. Allen JG, Fonagy P, Bateman AW.
Mentalizing in Clinical Practice .
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Publishing, 2008.
13. Bales DL, Verheul R, Hutsebaut J.
Barriers and facilitators to the
implementation of mentalization-based
treatment (MBT) for borderline
personality disorder. Personal Ment
Health 2017; 11: 118 –31.
14. Colli A, Tanzilli A, Dimaggio G, Lingiardi
V. Patient personality and therapist134 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
response: an empirical investigation. Am
J Psychiatry 2014; 171: 102 –8.
15. Bourke ME, Grenyer BF.
Psychotherapists ’response to borderline
personality disorder: a core conflictual
relationship theme analysis. Psychother
Res2010; 20: 680 –91.
16. Bales D, Bateman A. Partial
hospitalization settings. In: Bateman A,Fonagy P, eds. Handbook of Mentalizing
in Mental Health Practice . Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Publishing, 2012;
197–226.
17. Kjolbe M, Bateman A. Outpatient
settings. In: Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds.
Handbook of Mentalizing in Mental
Health Practice . Arlington, VA: American
Psychiatric Publishing, 2012; 227 –45.The Clinical Process of MBT: A Step-by-Step Guide 135
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part II
Chapter
5The Mentalization-Based Treatment Model in Practice
MBT Group (MBT-G)
Introduction
Mentalization-based treatment (MBT) is offered as a group intervention, known as
mentalization-based treatment group therapy (MBT-G), for adults and adolescents.
This chapter will summarize some key elements of MBT-G. More detail can be found
elsewhere [ 1,2].
Offering MBT-G requires the clinician to consider how to use the group process to
facilitate mentalizing without triggering too much anxiety in the patients. This is less of a
problem in the introductory phase of MBT (MBT-I; see Chapter 4 ), in which every group
session is organized around a topic and task. In this early phase the patients are learning
about the model and trying to apply the framework to themselves rather than being asked to
express their concerns about themselves to others and to “learn ”about themselves from
seeing themselves as others see them. MBT-I is the first part of engendering the “we-mode ”
(see Chapter 2 ) in patients; the group members are thinking together about a topic,
beginning to apply the knowledge to themselves, and expressing their thoughts about the
topic to others. However, when the group becomes organized around each patient express-
ing their personal problems to the others and learning from them, and focusing on their
more immediate interactions with each other, attachment anxiety is stimulated, potentially
leading to panic or avoidance. To address the potential harmful effects of intense attachment
anxiety, the clinician follows the MBT principles outlined in Chapters 3 and4, and structures
the group process. The clinician holds authority within the group by “stage-managing ”the
process of the group, somewhat less than normally occurs in a psychoeducation group but
more than is usual in a fully process-oriented group.
Structure of the Group
MBT-G is organized in a way that provides the best chance of engaging patients and
ensuring that the process of mentalizing themselves and others becomes the primary
focus. The structure is discussed in detail elsewhere [ 1–3]. The steps to follow in each
group session follow a trajectory as summarized in Figure 5.1 .
To a large extent, group participants are trained into the structure and function of
any group by the clinicians who are facilitating the group, and MBT-G clinicians have
authority in the group to set out the structures of the group and what is expected from
the participants. This is more than simply outlining practicalities, although of course that
is important to set the “macro-culture ”of the group. Many of these practical aspects,
particularly at the outset, are determined by the method of treatment —for example, rules
about timing and frequency, seating arrangements (e.g., in a circle or “classroom ”style),
136
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
and constraints on communication outside the group. It is the “micro-culture ”within
this that sets the atmosphere and specific social culture of the group, and is of distinct
importance in MBT-G. Any group starts to develop its own micro-culture, based on
agreed mores or traditions, but in MBT-G these are systematically developed through the
initial exploration and agreement of values. As a group develops, there will be other more
complex and subtle aspects of the group ’s culture, which will be more unique to the
group —for example, the “climate ”of the group, the position of authority figures,
attitudes of deference or otherwise to the group leader(s), and ways of managing
interruptions and emotional outbursts. The experience of being part of, being challenged
by, and contributing to the culture of this group is a fundamental aspect of MBT, because
it introduces and regulates the experience of making a cultural contribution.
The main components that the new clinician has to master in order to generate a
mentalizing culture within the group include how to introduce new patients into the
group and help them get started, and encouraging interpersonal mentalizing among
group members so that all of the discussion is not routed through talking only to the
clinician. Central to mentalizing is the principle that all participants are equal in terms of
learning from each other; the clinician and patients are all equally unable to know the
mental experience of others, although of course the clinician is often more skilled at
taking a not-knowing stance in order to explore this. Many patients will feel better
understood by their peers in the group than by the clinician, so an important task for the
clinician is to get the patients to talk to each other.
We shall now follow Sarah, the patient whose individual treatment we covered in
Chapter 4 , as she starts in the group.Present
summary of
previous
session
Go around
participants
to decide
on topic
Synthesis of
topics into
focus
ExplorationReview and
closureWrite
summary of
sessionFig. 5.1 Trajectory of an
MBT-Group session.MBT Group (MBT-G) 137
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Starting in an MBT Group
Engaging a new patient in an MBT group follows a structured process that is orches-
trated by the MBT clinician. This comprises:
/C15preparation of the existing group members and the new member
/C15relational passport presentation from the current group members
/C15relational passport presentation from the new member
/C15introduction and re-evaluation of the group values and culture.
MBT groups are open to new members when a place becomes available. Current
members transmit the group culture to new members in a number of organized ways;
the cultural milieu is not assumed to transfer and be absorbed passively.
1. The group clinician introduces all of the members to the new patient. They do
this in a relaxed manner, in the same way as they would do in an everyday social context
when introducing someone to others who did not know them, perhaps mentioning
something to the new person about each individual as they go round the group. This
introduction by the clinician allows them to say a little about themselves and their role in
the group before the group members introduce themselves in turn (which is the next
step, described in step 2 of this list).
Depending on the cohesion of the group, the clinician can also decide to present how
they experience themselves as being seen by each of the patients in the group. So, having
introduced themselves and said something about their role and their personality (e.g.,
“I tend to interrupt quite a lot and sometimes can say too much ”), they characterize the way
others see them in terms of a dynamic process (e.g., “Stan tends to be somewhat suspicious
of me as I experience it, and I contribute to that by wondering if you, Stan, are saying exactly
what you mean, ”“Layla listens to what I say very carefully and makes me anxious
occasionally as I feel that you, Layla, remember in incredible detail what I have said before
and then show me where I am going wrong or am inconsistent ”). The aim here is to model
an ability to characterize dynamic interactions in the group, both between the group
members and between the group members and the clinician(s) (some MBT groups have
more than one clinician). After the clinician ’s introduction, each group member is then
asked to undertake the same exercise and introduce themselves to the new participant.
2. Personal introductions prepared in the group the week before are delivered,
going round each person in turn . All of the patients revisit their current formulation
and are asked to use it as the basis of their personal introduction. The current group
members “rehearse ”their welcome to a new patient the week before their arrival in the
group. Rehearsal involves the patients revisiting their own formulations, including their
relational problems when they started in the group, and discussing what they have
learned during their time in the group. They are also asked to explore how they see
themselves now and, as outlined earlier for the clinician, how they think others in the
group see them. Similarly, new patients are coached in introducing themselves to the
group in an individual meeting before their entry into the group. In this initial meeting,
the patient and the group clinician use the formulation already developed in the
assessment sessions (as described in Chapter 4 ). The assessment and formulation stage
may have been completed by another member of the MBT team, and if this is the case a
handover of the clinical material from the assessor to the group clinician is necessary.
This is done in a tripartite meeting —of both clinicians and the patient —in which the138 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
assessor introduces the patient to the group clinician. The assessor may stay only for the
introduction, so that the patient and the group clinician can use the session to get to
know each other and write a relational passport . This is the document that all patients
present to the group on joining. In effect it is their own summary of why they are
attending the group, with an emphasis on their relational difficulties. This process
ensures that all patients in the group remain focused on the primary purpose of the
group, which is to explore mentalizing in the context of relationships.
Clinical Example: Preparation of the Group for Entry of a New Patient
The clinician has informed the group that Sarah is joining them the following week. He sets
up the “rehearsal ”of welcoming her.
CLINICIAN :Sarah starts next week, so we need to work out how we are going to make her welcome. In
MBT groups we like to revisit why we came and what things have been like in the group for us, so we
can tell Sarah about ourselves next week and help her feel relaxed about talking about herself. I have
brought everyone ’s early relational passport with me on these cards just as a reminder ( he hands
them out ). So let ’s talk about ourselves and consider how we were at the start and whether we have
changed. It helps to consider how we think we are seen by others in the group as well. I would like
everyone to write down some headlines about themselves on the cards and to use those to
introduce yourselves to Sarah next week. ( Some clinicians may ask the patients to write down a few key
points about these questions before they present what they think to the group .)
JOHN:When I came to this group I thought that I did not like people much and I was called avoidant
by the person who saw me. I thought that was rude really. I didn ’t think this was right, although
I knew that I kept away from people who annoyed me. This was most people, and I didn ’tb o t h e rt o
listen to them. I think that now I listen more carefully to people and try to think about what they
say. So I think I am better at being with people, and my partner says I am a nicer person.
CLINICIAN :How do you think you are seen in the group? It will be good for all of us to let Sarah know
how we are viewed in the group as well as how we see ourselves.
JOHN:That is for others to say, how they view me. But I think I am seen as a bit argumentative, when
really I am just trying to work things out for myself.
CORA:Yes. You are a bit argumentative, but I didn ’t realize that you were mostly trying to work
things out yourself.
CLINICIAN :Let’s discuss that for a moment. Tell us, Cora, what comes to your mind now John says
that is what he is doing when he appears argumentative?
The following week, Sarah attends the group for the first time.
Clinical Example: The First Group Session with a New Patient
CLINICIAN :Welcome to Sarah. Sarah, we always start the same way in the group. I will summarize
what happened last week as a reminder, and then we are all going to introduce ourselves.
After the summary, the clinician orchestrates the introductions, starting with themselves.MBT Group (MBT-G) 139
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
CLINICIAN :When I started in the group I was anxious a lot of the time about making the group useful
to people. I still worry about that, as some of you don ’t always come and I often want to ask what
can be done to make it more useful. I am the sort of person who has the urge to tell people what
to do, so I have to stop myself sometimes. I can talk too much as well, so I am happy for people to
tell me to shut up when I am talking too much. I think people see me as too controlling and there
is some tension about that, especially between me and Cora. Over time I have felt accepted by
everyone, though, and listened to, so I look forward to the group each week.
The group members then introduce themselves using the personal “headlines ”that they
developed the week before. It is anticipated that Sarah will be naturally anxious about
introducing herself, so the clinician offers support. Sarah, too, uses her relational passport
as the basis of her introduction.
CLINICIAN :Sarah, now it ’s your turn to say a little about yourself if you can.
SARAH:I am here because I want to save my relationship at the moment. I get very emotional and
insecure so I pester people all the time and ask them what they think of me. I want to be liked,
and coming in here frightens me. So I won ’t say anything in the group today and will listen if that
is OK.
CLINICIAN :Thanks, Sarah. If you have some thoughts about what is being talked about then please
do say, even though you feel a bit anxious. I will ask all the others not to bite!
3. The group atmosphere and values are then discussed. For example, do the
participants find the group facilitating, supportive, considerate, or more tense and
troubled? Is the current focus on relationships in their lives, or about managing emo-
tions, or about impulsivity, or all of the above? Are the values that were agreed at the
beginning of the group (e.g., respect, tolerance, acceptance of alternative perspectives and
views) being adhered to, and do they need further discussion?
For each proposed value, the group members discuss three specific questions, all of
which facilitate mentalizing in the group.
1. Is this value important to me, or do other people think that it is important and that
Ishould see it as important?
2. If we agree that it is important, how will we decide whether it is being followed? For
example, what are the indicators of intolerance/tolerance, or of unfairness/fairness?
3. Does this joint value play a role in my life at the present time?
Clinical Example: Group Values
CLINICIAN :Let’s now look again at the values we talk about so that Sarah knows about them and how
we implement them. Sarah, we all agree the values we follow in the group and try to keep to
them as best we can. The first one we have is “respect. ”Cora, would you like to say something
about that, as it is one that you are very keen on?
CORA:Do I have to?140 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
CLINICIAN :Yes!
CORA:Well, the others have to help me. Basically, Sarah, we have to listen to each other and care for
each other. Really it is like we think about the effects we are having on each other, but they have
to think about what effect they have on us, so it is shared out.
JOHN:It has something to do with agreeing with each other.
CLINICIAN :Can you say more about what you mean, John? ( The clinician ’s view is that agreeing with
someone is not a necessary component of respect .)
JOHN:Well, if you agree with something someone says it means you respect the person. I feel
respected when someone agrees with me.
CLINICIAN :What about when someone disagrees with you?
Reflection then takes place about how respect is shown and experienced in the group,
including the clinician ’s question about whether agreement is necessary or unnecessary,
until a shared understanding between all of the members is achieved. In this group, the
following points were agreed and written up on the board as a “Values Sheet. ”
/C15Use kind or polite words, even when you are upset.
/C15Use manners like sharing, waiting your turn, and giving positive regard to others.
/C15Ask questions of others with genuine interest in the answer.
/C15Accept difference, or at least use kind words when disagreeing.
/C15Be careful not to damage places or things or threaten others.
The list of agreed values on the Values Sheet can be emailed to all of the participants
or printed out for them after the session.
Stimulating Interpersonal Mentalizing
A key concern for clinicians is how to promote mentalizing between participants. The
interventions described in Chapter 4 are also all part of the clinician ’s activity in a group,
and the clinician has to have the skill to re-establish mentalizing in the face of non-
mentalizing. In groups, low mentalizing in one patient will trigger low mentalizing in
others, and disrupting this interactive process requires sensitivity and skill on the part of
the clinician. Interventions such as diversion, de-escalation, siding with vulnerable
patients, and triangulation are used by the clinician when low group mentalizing is
emerging. Siding is an important intervention for managing interpersonal anxiety
between participants and for preventing the escalation of a tense situation. Taking the
example of an interaction in which one patient is critical of another, who reacts by falling
silent, the clinician becomes the advocate for the vulnerable patient in responding to the
critical patient. The clinician responds on behalf of the person who seems to be the most
vulnerable: “That sounded a bit harsh. Where did that come from? ”Once the tension has
been released and the event can be thought about, the clinician can return to a not-
knowing stance that is more equidistant from both patients ’mental states.
Another factor in the group reduces learning about oneself from others. Too often
the conversational partnership is between each patient and the clinician rather thanMBT Group (MBT-G) 141
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
where it should be —between the patients themselves. The clinician needs either to be an
active but equal participant or to fade into the background and simply act as a catalyst for
the mentalizing process. They cannot be a “central distribution office ”for all discussion.
This collaborative and democratic process can be promoted by the following approaches:
1. education and discussion about the purpose of the group
2. allocation of protagonists to start discussion of an identified problem
3. using the not-knowing stance and triangulation
4. role play and exercises.
Purpose of the Group
The patients have already been socialized into the model through the MBT-I group and
so they already have some understanding of the purpose of the group. Nevertheless, the
purpose requires further explanation whenever a new patient joins the group, or if the
group loses direction, the purpose seems to have been lost, and a return to “factory
settings ”is required. In this situation, the purpose of the group is explained in everyday
language, making it relevant to the patients ’everyday concerns.
Asking other patients to explain the purpose of the group to a newcomer is fine, but
the clinician also needs to be clear in their mind about the purpose of the group. So in
this clinical example the clinician outlines the purpose of the group to Sarah.
Clinical Example: Outlining the Purpose of the Group
CLINICIAN :Sarah, this group is about learning about ourselves by talking to others. To do so, we have
to open ourselves up and let people know about our often more private struggles. This is why we
have just discussed the values we are using to work together. Being compassionate to each other
and kind is essential if we are going to talk openly and feel safe to do so. What we have to do is
listen carefully to each other and “see how others see us, ”especially if that clashes with how we
see ourselves. We also have to do the same for others in the group and be open about how we
see them, even if this might sound critical at times. So it is a practice ground really for managing
our relationships out there in the real world. We need to take what we learn here and apply it out
there and see what happens —do things work better or worse, do we feel better about ourselves,
can we stand up for ourselves when we need to, and so on. So one thing that is there in your
passport ( pointing to Sarah ’s card, which she used as an aide-memoire to introduce herself to the
group ) is your worry about whether you are liked, so no doubt that will be in your mind already in
relation to everyone here. When it is in your mind, perhaps you can let us know so that we can all
join in to work out where it is coming from in real time.
Allocation of Protagonists of the Discussion
After providing a summary of the last group session and going round all of the
participants asking if they have problems to discuss, the clinician works with the group
to bring their problems together. The aim of synthesizing problems is to stimulate “we-
mode ”in the group and make a focus that is shared through overlapping but different
aspects of a problem. For example, one patient may have difficulty with their partner,
whereas another is having trouble negotiating with an employer; for both patients this is142 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
likely to involve a focus on the ability to interact with others constructively. Alternatively,
one patient may be concerned about being liked when with others, whereas another has
no concerns about being with others or being liked or disliked by them; here the contrast
between opposites can be used to explore the issue of being with others and anxieties
about being liked or disliked. The clinician merely appoints the obvious protagonists to
start the conversation and asks the others to contribute as things come into their mind:
“Why don ’t Sarah and John start off and we will join in as things go along. So why not tell
each other about yourselves in this regard and perhaps give us a recent example .”
Clinical Example: Mentalizing the Narrative Between Group Members
Sarah describes a recent interaction with her current partner in which he became frus-
trated when she kept on asking him if he loved her and what she was like compared with
his previous girlfriend.
JOHN:You shouldn ’t even think about that. He would not be with you if he didn ’t want to be.
SARAH:I realize that, but you see I keep thinking about it and can ’t stop myself asking him. I believe
him but then I don ’t and I have to ask again.
JOHN:You like people too much, that is your problem. Most of us here don ’t like people so much, so
it’s easier.
CLINICIAN :I like people, or at least I like being with people. So I hope that you are not counting me in
the most of us!
CORA:You have to. But Sarah, what are you like when you are on your own? Do you need to be with
him for some reason?
SARAH:I don ’t know. I am not good on my own and I have talked about that before. When I am on
my own I feel “yuk”and have to go out. I don ’t know what it is.
The interaction can now go on between Sarah and John, and the other patients are asked
to engage with the work. The task of the clinician is to maintain the focus so that the group
addresses Sarah and John ’s issues, which can be summarized as dependent versus
avoidant.
CLINICIAN :Let’s keep this in mind, then —we are discussing whether we need people, enjoy being
with people, or are avoidant of people. I think we can all relate to something in that!
Triangulation Leading to a “Four-or-More-Way ”Interaction
The MBT clinician uses triangulation to facilitate interaction between participants that
gradually creates the potential for “we-mode ”or collective mentalizing (see Chapter 2 ).
The aim is to increase the patients ’experience of learning within a collective mentalizing
process. Collective mentalizing stimulates feelings of belonging, of no longer being alone,
or of being part of something more than oneself. Many patients lack this experience; its
absence is particularly poignant for people with BPD. Others, such as those diagnosed
with narcissistic personality disorder or antisocial personality disorder (discussed in
more detail in Chapters 6 and7, respectively), find it hard to generate socially construct-
ive collective mentalizing, and live within collective distrust; a positive experience of
collective mentalizing can be transformative for them. In collective mentalizing we tendMBT Group (MBT-G) 143
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
to be influenced by others, which may of course be a bad thing in some contexts, but in
this intervention it is encouraged so that no single perspective is allowed to dominate;
rather, a process of developing a shared perspective is given priority. Taking the
perspective of others and understanding their minds, adjusting the interaction gradually
to a mutual understanding, and then creating a shared reality are the key elements.
Together, these processes form robust affiliative and trusting relational bonds, which are
at the core of social cohesion but are so often lacking for patients in MBT.
Engendering these processes can be viewed as a stepwise procedure, but of course
when the intervention is used skillfully there will be no obvious structure and only a
natural human interactive process.
1.Create a situation in which two patients are interacting and focusing on a
problem. This emerges naturally after the clinician has appointed the two main
protagonists to start the discussion.
2.Involve a third person to act as the commentator and questioner on the problem
in focus. This is the initial triangulation. This person is not encouraged to talk about
their own problems at this point, but is tasked with supporting the elaboration of the
problem areas under scrutiny by the protagonists, using a not-knowing stance.
3.Other patients may also be included in the discussion of the problem in focus —
this creates a “four-or-more-way ”interaction.
4.Once the problem has been elaborated, the whole group then talks together about
what they have learned from the two patients who were the initial protagonists of the
discussion; this is the final phase of collective mentalizing. What do they take for
themselves, individually? What can we (as a group) get out of this together and then
take home to use in our life outside treatment?
The initial step helps the two protagonists to begin to develop alternative perspectives
about their problem area, seeing it from a new angle and in more detail. The third person
is then introduced and guided by the clinician to take a not-knowing stance (in which they
have been trained during the MBT-I group), and is prevented from giving the protagonists
advice or telling them what to do. The aim of the fourth and final step is to stimulate
learning in the other patients who have observed the process and listened to the discussion.
In order to achieve a shared understanding, it is necessary to attune one ’so w nv i e wt o w a r d
another ’s views with the overarching goal of affiliative motivation toward this person.
Although patients with personality disorders commonly appear to lack this motivation,
there is no doubt that it is not far beneath the surface, pushing to get out. The evidence
indicates that from infancy onward individuals need to share their inner states (beliefs,
goals, thoughts, and feelings) and build a shared mind (or common goal), but trauma and
persistent distrust in the world get in the way. Therefore triangulation and “four-or-more-
way”interaction become a primary goal in MBT-G. There is nothing like rehearsal and
repetition for learning, and so repeating these four steps of triangulation and four-or-
more-way interaction envelops the exploration of problems in MBT-G.
Clinical Example: Triangulation
CLINICIAN :Perhaps if Stanley and Sarah start and you, John, ask them questions as they go along. We
will then chip in to try to follow from your points of view. Afterwards we will have a brainstorm
about what we have learned for ourselves.144 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
SARAH:Stanley, you go first.
STANLEY :OK. I had an argument with my girlfriend and she is now frightened to come home. I told
her that I have calmed down but she does not believe me.
SARAH:What happened?
Stanley describes a brutal argument he had with his partner as she was going out with
a friend and he did not want her to.
SARAH:She shouldn ’t have gone then, if you felt so strongly about it.
CLINICIAN :Hang on. That is a comment on her, Sarah, and we are trying to work out what has been
going on in Stanley ’s mind.
SARAH:Oh, OK then. What was so important, why didn ’t you want her to?
STANLEY :I think she was only going out because I didn ’t want her to and she knew that.
SARAH:What is the difficulty for you that she wants to?
STANLEY :We are a couple and she should ask me.
JOHN:Is that how you are together —you in charge of what she does?
STANLEY :Yes, our relationship works like that.
CORA:For whom? ( Adding a slightly challenging four-way intervention without any prompting from the
clinician. )
After some further discussion, the clinician moves the discussion to the final step.
CLINICIAN :Let’s all talk together about what we are learning from this about how we manage our
own relationships.
CORA:It makes me think about how much I try to control what happens in a relationship. Stanley
likes to be in control and I can see that I quite like to have that, too. I ’m not sure why though.
I suppose it is because I get anxious that my partner doesn ’t like me or something or might meet
someone else. Not very confident, I suppose.
STANLEY :Yes, that is right for me, although I am confident. I just think she might meet someone else
and prefer them.
CORA:What is it about you that she doesn ’t like, then?
SARAH:Do you ask her all the time if she loves you? That is what I do, as you know. I always think my
boyfriend likes other people more than me.
The group has returned to the triangulation four-or-more-way interaction, which is
perfect for further exploration, and the clinician now only needs to monitor the
conversation, checking that it is in “mentalizing mode ”and that interactions do not
trigger low mentalizing. However, the clinician will eventually return to the final step of
the intervention, ensuring that there is discussion about what the group as a whole has
learned from each individual perspective.MBT Group (MBT-G) 145
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Role Play and Exercises
MBT is permissive in terms of interventions as long as they are in the service of
stimulating mentalizing and increasing mental flexibility within social and personal
relationships. In running MBT-G, the clinician constantly follows the principal aim of
stimulating a mentalizing culture. Although role plays and exercises are a vehicle for
explicit mentalizing process and observational examples, the purpose of using them in
MBT-G is to instill over time an implicit, intuitive understanding of internal states that
supports the creation of a mentalizing group and facilitates personal mentalizing in
social interactions. The patients then have a chance of repositioning themselves in their
own social worlds outside the group. There is a constant tension in MBT between the
clinician teaching without being a teacher and generating a culture for patients to learn
without being “told”and “educated. ”Patients do not want to feel that they are in a
classroom, and yet there has to be a route to embedding intuitive understanding in
mental function. This is in part achieved by incorporating explicit understanding and
learning into implicit processing. In MBT we assume that in any successful social
interaction the balance between implicit and explicit processing is optimal, so rehearsing
this effectively in the group on a regular basis is warranted. To achieve this aim,
occasional role plays are especially useful in MBT-G. Above all, when they work well,
they encourage perspective taking within an atmosphere of playfulness (see [ 4]).
Many MBT groups have two clinicians, and it is instructive for patients if the
clinicians are the main players in mini role plays. This is a technique commonly used
in the MBT-I group to emphasize some key points —for example, for illustrating poor
mentalizing or how to take a not-knowing stance. In MBT-G, mini role plays are less
frequent but can nevertheless be useful. The clinician can perhaps invert the roles and
“become ”the patient while one of the members of the group becomes the clinician. This
inverted role play can be started by the clinician stating: “Imagine that I am you, Sarah,
and you are me. I am telling you how I feel, and you, as the therapist, will respond to what
I am saying .”This technique makes use of the curated temporary loss of self-mentalizing;
the real patient is now someone else (the clinician), and is freed from their own concerns
about how the other person ’s views affect and challenge their self-perception. Patients
become the other person momentarily, forgetting themselves. Working in this way
allows individuals to assume a meta-perspective, freeing them from themselves to look
at themselves. At the same time, the other patients who are observing can also reflect on
what they have observed (step 4 of the triangulation process described earlier), with the
clinician returning to their own role and asking them to report on what they have
observed and learned for themselves from the role play.
Role plays can also be used to explore problematic interchanges between patients, or
between the clinician and patients. Here the clinician manages the mentalizing process
(see Chapter 4 ) and presses the pause button, rewinds the discussion if possible, and
initially addresses non-mentalizing modes. Once calm has been restored and mentalizing
is stable in most of the participants, a role play can be established that replays the
argument, but with the patients who are involved changing chairs and “being ”the other
person. This exercise usually proves challenging, and the patients may refuse to take part.
In this situation it is best to manage the low mentalizing at the time and then revisit the
interpersonal problem later, perhaps in a subsequent group session. Therefore the
clinician:146 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
1. names and notes the interaction and the main protagonists
2. summarizes the problem at the end of the session
3. re-presents the problem in the next group session.
However, if the current level of mentalizing in the participants and the atmosphere
and the overall culture of the group allows, the clinician can suggest that they “replay ”
the argument, but with interchanged roles following the procedures for triangulation and
four-or-more-way interaction. The protagonists are asked to change seats and to “be”the
other person, with each having to use the attitude and precise words that the other had
delivered previously, which had triggered the problem. If possible, it is best for each
person to say aloud what they think was going on in the mind of the person they are role
playing before the incident: “John, you are now Stanley. Can you talk as Stanley before
this happened, saying aloud what is going on in your mind? How were you, Stanley, before
this happened (the clinician looks at John, who is playing Stanley) ? What sort of things
were you thinking about? ”This encourages everyone in the group to consider personal
mental context as having a significant influence on an individual ’s current sensitivity and
reactivity to others in the group.
Closure
A short period of time for closure of each group session, around 10 –15 minutes, is
recommended. This is a phase of consolidation of what has been learned in the session
and how it can be translated usefully into everyday life, what themes were relevant to
social relationships, what remains unaddressed, and how the group will take any issues
forward. The outcome of this discussion forms the main body of the summary of the
session that is written by the clinician ready for the following week ’s session.
Clinical Example: Closure of the Group Session
CLINICIAN :So, let ’s think about all the things we have talked about today. What comes across to me is
the uncertainty we all have about who is in control of a relationship and how that can interfere
with what we want.
SARAH:Yes, I feel completely out of control of all my relationships except with my son. His father is a
nightmare, and I worry all the time that he will report me so I try not to be difficult with him; my
current partner is really nice but I nag at him about how much he loves me and I am so
dependent it frightens me.
STANLEY :I am in control but I have to listen to you all because it is messing up my relationship and
my girlfriend doesn ’t need to be frightened of me. Maybe I will try to say sorry to her.
CLINICIAN :Yes, see how that goes. You have to really mean it, though. Is there something in all our
discussion about whether we value ourselves as well? Stanley, you talked about feeling small
when your girlfriend did what she wanted and went out. I am not sure we have got to the bottom
of that. Can you have a think about it and we can bring it back next week?
There was further discussion about whether men were naturally in charge of any
relationship. There were indications that the group members were organizing this discus-
sion in pretend mode, with generalization to society and the patients concluding that thisMBT Group (MBT-G) 147
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
imbalance was normal in a relationship, as men were stronger than women. Sarah in
particular seemed to defer to this view: “I think that is right and I feel better when it is like
that.”This discussion, elaborated in pretend mode, was challenged by the clinician:
CLINICIAN :Hang on. That is very convenient. So we don ’t have to concern ourselves with the issue,
I suppose? We have just been considering how you, Stanley, feel weak and that is the problem.
Sarah, we also discussed your insecurity within yourself and difficulty in knowing what you want
as the main issue. So let ’s not get away from how much we are contributing to the balance, or
lack of it, in our relationships. I am going to write it down for next week: “Who am I when I am
with someone else? ”We can start there.
The clinician is now beginning to note the theme of “vulnerable self, ”and he writes
this up on the Values Sheet. Sarah has a fragile experience of herself, especially when she
is with others. Stanley has a more self-serving view of himself as the most important
player in any relationship. Cora is more secure in her self-experience. Later, the other
patients in the group will be asked to consider themselves in the light of this theme, as in
step 4 of triangulation.
Virtual and Digital Health: Online MBT
There is increasing interest in the delivery of MBT through telehealth (i.e., online). Although
this might seem straightforward for individual sessions, it is more problematic for groups. In
this section we shall discuss some aspects of group and individual work that are relevant to
translating MBT from a face-to-face treatment to a clinician-led online format.
The time-honored method of delivering psychological treatments has remained more
or less unchanged since the inception of psychotherapy. In group or individual therapy,
patients attend a consulting room at a particular time and meet a clinician face to face.
MBT is no exception to this arrangement. Sitting in a circle as a group, or at a slight
angle to each other in individual sessions, the patient(s) and clinician create a physical
setting that is insulated as far as possible from the distractions of external reality, to
create conditions in which to explore the patient ’s internal states of mind, engage in
exercises, or practice skills in order to reduce their distress and improve their mental
health. The setting establishes an almost “virtual reality, ”created by the clinician and the
patient(s), in which they have a shared world in which physical reality symbolizes the
mental reality of “we-mode ”functioning (see Chapter 2 ). Unsurprisingly, this cosy
model has come under scrutiny, challenged by the development of new technologies
and factors such as infection control in the earlier phases of the COVID-19 pandemic,
when social isolation of the population was mandated by governments around the world,
and face-to-face meetings were limited. More significant are the changing styles of social
interaction, which are making virtual interaction the “new normal. ”Young people in
particular may communicate more through text chat and social networking sites than
they do in person; others may inhabit their own fantasy worlds in cyberspace, living
parallel lives as different characters; computer games become more real than the “real
world, ”which is experienced as alien and uncomfortable. The conventional boundaries
and channels of communication between the internal world and the external world are
blurred. Virtual worlds sometimes feel safer and more manageable than daily reality. As
a consequence of all these changes, MBT is also now offered remotely. Remote148 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
interventions were already being used in “traditional ”MBT at times of crisis, via
telephone, email, or text messages, but the whole treatment program can be conducted
online with nearly all of the sessions taking place remotely.
The move to online treatment has some immediate advantages in terms of patient
access, which is no longer limited by geographical distance and problems with travel.
Many patients prefer the easy access offered by online treatment, and anecdotal evidence
suggests that attendance rates for online MBT groups are higher than those for in-person
groups. Patients can join from home and can be provided with secure links to access the
treatment sessions, and, if they prefer, they can remain relatively anonymous. However,
some patients may not have access to a computer or smartphone or an adequate internet
connection, limiting their opportunity to take part in sessions. Providers of online
psychological treatments (and indeed all telehealth services) need to offer practical ways
to address these problems so that online/remote treatment is accessible and practicable
for everyone. Psychological vulnerability may also influence the uptake of online treat-
ments. Vulnerable participants may find it difficult to engage with digital content; for
these patients, it may be helpful to provide some initial face-to-face sessions that offer
preparatory support and information. Patients with BPD are often relationship/treat-
ment seeking [ 5] and want human contact, so they may prefer face-to-face meetings and
refuse online treatment, although in the authors ’current experience this is rare.
Once the practical considerations have been addressed, the question arises of how, if
at all, the format of delivery influences the delivery of interventions that facilitate the
development of robust mentalizing. Here we provide a few suggestions about transfer-
ring face-to-face MBT to a remotely delivered program. This format of treatment will be
the subject of future research.
Assessment and Formulation
Some MBT clinicians prefer to complete the assessment and formulation stage of MBT
face to face. The clinician who completes the assessment phase is the primary clinician
for the patient ’s subsequent treatment. Initial face-to-face meetings allow all practical
concerns to be addressed, as well as the development of a more personal relationship
between the patient and the clinician so that they have a physically embodied subjective
experience of each other. The “feel”of having another person in the room can help the
development of a therapeutic alliance and support the collaborative construction of a
personalized MBT formulation. Necessarily, the patient and clinician discuss problems
and anxieties about treatment, and “rehearse ”the beginning of the group sessions that
the patient will join. In practical terms, the patient can also be given a tutorial on
negotiating the platform on which online materials are stored (e.g., the materials for
MBT-I; see Chapter 4 ), and treatment will be offered.
Qualitative feedback suggests that crisis planning is also better done in person.
Clinicians use considerable subjective experience in their assessment of risk —for
example, taking into account their own level of anxiety about a patient ’s suicidality —
and this feels more substantial and accessible to them in face-to-face meetings.
MBT-I Online
The online MBT-I group is run by two clinicians and follows the same structure as the in-
person group (see Chapter 4 ). In the first session, the patients introduce themselves andMBT Group (MBT-G) 149
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
present some of their relational passport (described earlier in this chapter), which has been
rehearsed with the assessing clinician in the initial assessment phase. Before this somewhat
exposing beginning, an “icebreaker ”is used (as will be described shortly) with discussion
about the problems that come with meeting online. Group principles are agreed and
decisions taken about whether participants will have their cameras on or off, how to
manage any patients who feel unable to look at themselves on screen (the patient can be
advised to use the Hide Self View option if this is available, or to place a sticky note on their
laptop screen to cover their image, which some patients find useful), and how to leave the
group if this becomes necessary (the patient can interrupt with their hand raised or put a
message in the chat saying “I need to move to a breakout room ”; the clinician then moves
the patient to another virtual room and joins them to assess the situation).
Patients are given access to the material for each group session in advance of the
session, and are encouraged to read it ahead of time so that they are in a position to
question the clinician about the material as it is discussed. Exercises in online MBT-I are
used in the same way as in face-to-face sessions. The clinician can use a range of features
and tools to make things easier for the patients during online sessions.
/C15Use icebreakers for the group, such as “animal masks ”(the avatars and virtual masks
that are features of some online platforms, e.g., Zoom). The clinician and each of the
patients choose a mask and put it on. Led by the clinician, the patients have to say
what they think each person ’s choice of mask says about the person. The patient then
talks about why they have chosen the mask.
/C15Divide the group into two breakout rooms, each with a clinician. The groups discuss
the topic of the session and then each group reports back to the main room about
their discussion.
/C15Share the clinician ’s screen for showing materials and for creating them (e.g., a list of
the agreed group values) in the course of the group session.
/C15Show the patients some aspects of the room in which the clinician is sitting, and
explain their origins and meaning. Ask the patients to choose one or two objects in
their room that they feel able to talk about.
/C15Use breakout rooms to take a participant out of the main group if they become
anxious or at risk. One clinician goes with that patient to talk to them privately while
the other clinician continues with the group.
/C15Use the chat facility to allow patients to note down their thoughts while others are
talking; some patients may be hesitant to interrupt and assert themselves verbally,
and find using the chat easier.
/C15Online materials can be made available for the patients week by week, as well as some
guided self-help content.
/C15Online video/tasks related to topics, such as film clips or role plays, can be used.
MBT-G Online
Once the practicalities have been worked out, the initial sessions focus on how mentaliz-
ing each other “on screen ”can be enhanced. In groups, mentalizing of others occurs
more reliably if all of the participants can be seen on a single screen. In those groups that
use a structured discussion of problems after going around the participants at the
beginning of the group, or those that give patients a particular task (for an example of
this type of work with patients with trauma, see Chapter 11 ), the clinicians spotlight150 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
themselves and the person who is presenting their problem for discussion; the others
become the viewers and can gain more detailed information about the person ’s mental
state from their facial expression and body posture. Patients are asked to be as expressive
as they can when talking online, because it can be much harder for the other participants
to read facial expressions and eye movements on screen than in person.
Early in the formation of the group, practicing mentalizing others ’inner states inter-
actively using exaggerated facial expressions (e.g., happy/sad/angry faces) can help to ease
anxieties —for example, the clinician playfully makes a face and the patients have to say what
emotion is being expressed. A range of exercises will already have been used in MBT-I, and
these can be repeated as role plays between the clinicians to illustrate the importance of
looking at each other online —for example, one clinician makes a sad face and the other
clinician has to take a not-knowing stance as they explore the underlying mental states.
In the exploratory phase of MBT groups, clinicians need to maintain the interest of
all participants and be especially sensitive to frustrations arising from the online format.
A patient who has continual problems with their computer or internet connection may
dominate a group, dropping in and out and causing interruptions and irritation to the
rest of the group. A patient who is at risk may suddenly leave the group, causing anxiety
in the clinician and perhaps in other patients who might demand that the clinician “does
something. ”In such situations it is best to have a pre-arranged plan of action agreed with
all patients about what will happen —for example, the clinician will contact the patient at
the end of the group, and the patient agrees to answer a telephone call.
Exercises between all of the participants may be used more often. For example, when
working on the values of the group or thinking about a particular patient ’s problem, the
group can be divided into two using random allocation of participants, with each group
then being placed, with one of the clinicians, in a separate breakout room to discuss
the problem.
In the previous clinical example in this chapter, Sarah recognizes that she has an issue
with being out of control in her relationships, and Stanley is aware that he has an issue
with over-control. Let us explore how this issue might be tackled in the next session,
which is taking place online.
Clinical Example: Mentalizing Exercise
CLINICIAN :Let’s do more work on this issue about control in relationships. Perhaps each of us needs to
consider whether we are under- or over-controlling in our relationships, like Sarah and Stanley have
done. Then we can think together with Sarah about managing her feeling of being out of control.
CLINICIAN :(turning to Stanley ) Stanley, we can do the same later with you about having too
much control.
CLINICIAN :We will divide into two groups and go to different rooms. I will be in one and my
colleague will be in the other, and we can see what we can come up with. Sarah, you join one of
the groups and you can change halfway through, just as we normally do, if you like.
CLINICIAN :So, think about ourselves first and then how we might manage our relationships when we
feel out of control. Remember, we are not trying to come up with practical advice for Sarah. We
want to think about ourselves in terms of being under- or over-controlled and then think about
how that helps us understand the struggle Sarah is having.MBT Group (MBT-G) 151
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
After the discussions in the breakout rooms, the two subgroups then report back to
each other. This process facilitates interaction and discussion between members, with the
aim of engendering “we-mode ”function within the whole group. The subgroups engage
in a shared activity, talking together about a problem that is not theirs. In effect they are
sharing their thoughts, feelings, and impressions with a subgroup of a social system (the
whole group), collaborating and then repositioning themselves back into the whole
group, which subsequently collaborates to join up the subgroup experiences and embed
them within the larger group. This creates a perspective that is similar to but not the
same as the point of view of either of the subgroups, and hopefully is one around which
all of the participants can organize to support Sarah.
In all MBT groups the clinician(s) and patients review the themes of the session and
reflect on what has been discussed and learned toward the end of each weekly session.
This forms the basis of the summary to be presented at the start of the next session. In
online treatment, the summary is routinely emailed to all of the participants before being
recorded in the patients ’notes. The aims of emailing the summary are to encourage
further reflection by the patients on the material discussed, to establish continuity of the
digital format between group sessions, and to maintain transparency about the clinician ’s
thoughts and impressions about the group process. An emailed summary can also be
used after face-to-face group sessions to maintain continuity between sessions and
encourage self-reflection, and many MBT clinicians now do this.
MBT Individual Therapy Online
Individual sessions online are to some extent less complex than group sessions and
require only limited alteration. Some patients, perhaps those with avoidant attachment
strategies, become more comfortable and find it easier to talk online than when meeting
in person. In contrast, those who are anxious and ambivalent can find online sessions
more difficult, and cannot easily use the relationship with the clinician to soothe their
anxieties. The MBT clinician has to appraise the patient ’s level of anxiety carefully and
use the digital interface to create a more comfortable interaction. To do this, the clinician
identifies early in treatment the “elephant in the room ”(seeChapter 4 ) that is created by
the online format, and immediately tries to characterize it by verbalizing the anxieties
that interfere with the patient –clinician relationship. As with all “elephants, ”the clin-
ician ’s own anxieties are also specified. Clinicians may find working online more
problematic than working face to face and feel uncomfortable themselves: “I find it
difficult to see myself all the time as well, especially when I think I look so old. What is it
like for you looking at yourself ’? How shall we address this? ”
Using anxieties and problems related to the virtual format to share experiences
supports relational mentalizing and the creation of a “virtual we-mode. ”The clinician
and the patient talk together about the limitations of the format and how meeting online
is not the same as meeting in person: “What do you feel is missing? What seems easier? ”
Taking a not-knowing stance to address these concerns makes relational mentalizing
more of a natural conversation and less subjectively intense than in person. Nevertheless,
the dangers that accompany relational mentalizing, such as triggering pretend mode, are
as relevant during online sessions as they are in face-to-face interactions. Clinicians need
to take care not to attribute things to the patient ’s psychological problems when they are
really to do with the interface and, conversely, not to put things down to the online152 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
format when they are in fact relevant to the patient ’s problems. Those patients who have
problems connecting online on a regular basis may be those who would also find it
difficult to arrive on time for meetings in person, and this problem needs sensitive
exploration. Others may have a limited understanding of computer/smartphone func-
tion and become frustrated as they experience a sense of alienation and cannot get the
help they need. Rather than working immediately on their alienation, it might be best
initially to give them some coaching sessions on the platform that is being used for the
therapy sessions.
Concluding Remarks
The MBT group is a practice ground for mentalizing with others. The clinician is an
integral part of the group and an active participant, who has authority for managing the
group but without being authoritarian. In keeping with the principles of MBT, there is a
level of equality between patients and clinicians in terms of sharing mental states, and so
the clinician is inthe group rather than on the edge commenting onthe group. Taking a
not-knowing stance to stimulate exploration and using organized interactions between
participants encourages all of the group members to play a part. Clinician-led exercises
may be used to facilitate this, and when working online these are particularly important
for embedding the active participation of all group members as part of the group culture.
The importance of generating group values that are carried forward by the group over
time cannot be overstated. Learning from others in constructive social interactions
requires a level of epistemic trust between people that can only be engendered if there
is a shared culture created by everyone who takes part.
References
1. Karterud S. Mentalization-Based Group
Therapy (MBT-G): A Theoretical, Clinical,
and Research Manual . Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2015.
2. Bateman A, Kongerslev M, Hansen SB.
Group therapy for adults and adolescents.
In: Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds. Handbook
of Mentalizing in Mental Health Practice ,
2nd ed. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association Publishing, 2019;
117–33.3. Bateman A, Fonagy P. Mentalization-
Based Treatment for Personality
Disorders: A Practical Guide . Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2016.
4. Asen E, Fonagy P. Mentalization-Based
Treatment with Families . New York, NY:
The Guilford Press, 2021.
5. Tyrer P, Mitchard S, Methuen C, Ranger
M. Treatment rejecting and treatment
seeking personality disorders: Type R and
Type S. J Pers Disord 2003; 17:
263–8.MBT Group (MBT-G) 153
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
h di 00 98088960 4006 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part III
Chapter
6Application and Adaptations for Mental Health
Presentations
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Introduction
Clinicians have become increasingly interested in narcissistic personality functioning
(NPF). Perhaps this is just as well given the earlier threats from the DSM and ICD-11
work groups on personality disorder to remove narcissistic personality disorder (NPD)
from categorical classifications due to the lack of research into the condition [ 1,2]. Taking
a mentalizing approach transcends the issue of category, as it requires the clinician to
assess personality in terms of the dimensional domains of mentalizing, rather than to
establish the presence or absence of specific descriptive characteristics. The details of the
(im)balance of dimensional components that may be creating disruption to the patient ’s
social experience form the center of a more personalized evaluation. Our general prefer-
ence is to avoid labeling where possible and to refer to process and action. Therefore, in
this chapter, for much of the time we refer to NPF, narcissistic functioning, or simply
narcissism, rather than NPD. However, being somewhat inconsistent, we also refer to
mentalization-based treatment (MBT) for NPD (MBT-NPD) to indicate that treating
patients with high levels of narcissism requires modification of the original MBT protocol,
which was developed to treat patients with borderline personality disorder (BPD).
In many ways the mentalizing approach aligns with a common-sense approach often
found in everyday life, where people describe a range of attributes of narcissism when talking
about people they know. Individuals are described in characteristic ways —for example, “full
of themselves ,”“only thinks of himself ,”“she thinks that she is better than everyone else ,”“He is
a show-off, bumptious .”The emphasis is on the person ’s heightened self-regard and self-
image —for example, “They are all self, self, self, with no consideration of others. ”There is
perhaps excess focus on feeling and looking good, in order to impress and be admired by
others. Then there are those who show different aspects of narcissism, described as “some-
what too perfectionistic ”or“too meticulous ”—they spend an excessive amount of time
working on getting something “right, ”being over-particular, and trying to meet mysterious
unachievable standards, only to collapse in a heap and become unable to function when they
fail. There is an essential flaw to all this self-obsession, which becomes apparent when
extreme sensitivity to criticism (real or perceived) leads to reactivity and defensiveness
because it activates the threat of humiliation. Even violence can be used to manage this risk.
The disparate aspects of everyday narcissism have one thing in common —they all
relate to self-esteem and its management. Mentalizing is the manager of self-esteem. In
short, healthy narcissism is the internal management of self-regard and public image
through effective mentalizing. If psychic equivalence, pretend mode, or teleological
thinking (described in Chapter 2 ) start to emerge in relation to how understanding action
155
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
is experienced in self and other, the potential for distorted self-evaluation increases. To
manage self-regard and public image well, we need not only a stable self-experience but
also an ability to use external factors and relationships appropriately to augment our self-
esteem while simultaneously reducing threats that might diminish our positive sense of
ourselves. Ineffective mentalizing undermines these processes. Managing the social envir-
onment in a manipulative teleological mode undermines social relationships. Interpreting
comments or actions by others excessively concretely, in psychic equivalence, makes the
person vulnerable to feeling criticized and devalued. By contrast, detaching from social
experience in pretend mode can exaggerate self-worth and may increase the risk of
grandiosity. Effective mentalizing addresses the reactions of others with curiosity, does
not accept an initial reaction in either the other or the self as real and definitive but as
momentary and liable to change, and, most importantly, is always cautious in relation to
black-and-white thinking, and addresses even positive evaluations with humility and
judicious balance. When ineffective mentalizing dominates, these healthy narcissistic
processes are compromised, the balance of effective mentalizing is disrupted by over- or
underuse of a particular aspect, and natural self-protective narcissism begins to interfere
with intimate relationships with others and distorts social interactions. In the next section
(Assessment and Formulation) we shall describe how this can happen.
Before doing this, we wish to inject a little cautious (mentalizing) humility. We
recognize that MBT is following a long line of therapies and therapists that have tackled
this issue, perhaps better and more effectively than how we suggest here. Our aim is not
to try to rival alternative approaches to supporting individuals who find themselves
struggling with low self-worth or exaggerated self-importance. It is merely to place a
selection of ideas and techniques presented by many brilliant clinical minds in the
context of an MBT formulation and treatment. Along with many who offer such
support, we also believe that when implementing the mentalizing model in clinical
practice it is useful to think about grandiose and vulnerable narcissism, also known as
thick- and thin-skinned narcissism, respectively. The characteristics of the grandiose type
have been well described in the literature, and are summarized in Box 6.1 .
Box 6.1 Characteristics of individuals with grandiose narcissism.
/C15Have an exaggerated sense of self-importance.
/C15Have a sense of entitlement and require constant, excessive admiration.
/C15Believe that they are superior and can only associate with equally special people
(e.g., need to be treated by the head of the clinic).
/C15Expect to be recognized as superior even without obvious achievements.
/C15Exaggerate their achievements and talents.
/C15Are preoccupied with fantasies about success, power, brilliance, beauty, or the
perfect partner.
/C15Monopolize conversations and belittle people whom they perceive as inferior or
a threat.
/C15Expect special favors and unquestioning compliance with their expectations/opinions.
/C15Take advantage of others to get what they want.
/C15Lack empathy.
/C15Are envious of others and believe that others envy them.
/C15Behave in an arrogant or haughty manner, coming across as conceited, boastful,
and pretentious.156 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Many authors believe that these characteristics serve to cover profound feelings of
insecurity and shame and to keep at bay a pervasive sense of inadequacy. Whatever the
merits of this view, the excessive self-regard can become habit forming, “structured into
the personality, ”with little hint of the turbulent waters beneath. Other patients show a
mix of characteristics and are not stable in either their grandiosity or their vulnerability.
Some patients are persistently fragile —this is the person whose experience is dominated
by vulnerable narcissistic function, who may be almost unrelentingly shy, avoidant,
needy, hypervigilant, and sensitive to others ’regard, and whose fragile self-esteem
needs continual top-ups of admiration from others. In all of these presentations the
MBT clinician will readily find the hallmarks of inadequate mentalizing. Social inter-
actions become dangerous if psychic equivalence dominates, and comments that are
possible to interpret as criticism are immediately represented as permanent and as
unchangeable as physical reality. It is hardly surprising that hypersensitivity is the
consequence. By the same token, in psychic equivalence, imagining oneself to possess
exceptional capabilities is as good as actually having them. This impression can, of
course, be bolstered by teleological thinking and organizing those around the individual
to act toward them in a way that confirms their imagined exceptional talent. Pretend
mode removes the tethering that physical reality normally imposes on thoughts and
feelings about what others are actually experiencing, which means that claims can be
made about being loved, admired, and appreciated without the usual requisite evidence
for this in others ’behavior.
Although this presentation is not hard to understand or interpret in terms of
inadequate mentalizing, it creates challenges for the direct application of the techniques
that we have considered thus far in this book. The complexity of the presentation creates
a range of difficulties for the clinician, necessitating some modifications to the MBT
clinical model, which are the subject of this chapter. However, the most important point
to make is that the backbone of the MBT structure remains the same —assessment of
mentalizing, formulation in terms of long-term problems in mentalizing, socializing the
patient to the MBT model, an intervention process that aims to repair ineffective
mentalizing, and ending the process in the way that is most likely to ensure long-
term change.
Assessment and Formulation
Unsurprisingly, assessment of self-function and other representation take priority,
although all of the other components of MBT assessment and formulation are also
required (see Chapter 4 ). The compassionate and non-judgmental stance of MBT is an
absolute requirement during assessment of narcissistic functioning. Enquiry is framed
throughout to give credibility to the patient ’s explanations, to avoid challenging their
narrative. Imagine how humiliating it is for individuals with high ideals and an over-
valued idea of themselves to ask for help, or for those who feel particularly vulnerable
and require admiration from others to feel misunderstood and unwanted by the very
person they are coming to for help. A reaction to the shame experienced with the
intensity of psychic equivalence is likely to blow therapy out of the water by activating
the protective armor of the narcissism, with the clinician being accused of incompetence,
inadequacy, and not being up to the job. Such explosive criticism can easily lead to
formal complaints, a demand to see someone more senior and experienced, and similarNarcissistic Personality Disorder 157
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
time-consuming outcomes, all of which can be avoided with adequate clinician sensitiv-
ity and understanding of the complications of predominantly ineffective mentalizing.
When appraising the patient, the clinicia n is explicit about the aims of the assessment —
that is, to develop a detailed mentalizing profile and evaluate how this impacts on the
patient ’s life. In early iterations of mentalizing theory there were attempts to contrast the
developmental origins of narcissistic and borderline function. It was suggested that in both
conditions there had been a developmental ins ult arising from an imbalance in contingent
marked mirroring from the caregiver. Vulnerability to borderline functioning arose from
the caregiver providing congruent but unmarked mirroring, leading to an unstable self. In
contrast, in narcissistic functioning the opposite was true, with the caregiver providing
marked but incongruent mirroring, leading to a “not-me ”/false self-structure [ 3]. If only life
and development were so simple!
Yet the developmental perspective is a reminder that during assessment the clinician
needs to explore the patient ’s social activity in order to understand whether their
subjective experience is that others are providing adequately marked and contingent
responses to their inner states of mind. In NPF we are more likely to find a person who is
persistently at odds with what they experience as being reflected of them in interpersonal
contexts. Non-contingent or incongruent reflection, which feels like a poor match to
their subjective experience, will leave a person feeling that although the response might
be about them, it does not fully or accurately reflect their subjective (emotional) self. In
the absence of this match they are left feeling non-validated and, if their self-esteem is
particularly low, invalidated. The incongruence or mismatch therefore engenders empti-
ness and a lack of recognition of “true”feeling states, which is a hallmark of vulnerable
narcissistic function. It also leads to isolation and loneliness in the socially interactive
world.
This mismatch is experienced even if the reflection from others is positive. The
essential part is the mismatch of inner state in the timing, valence, or intensity of
reflection from others. Non-contingent parental overvaluation in place of a more
nuanced evaluation of self may have the same effect. The child is seen as superior to
others, more talented, special, and having the right to feel entitled. However, this is the
parental belief about the child and not necessarily the child ’s constitutional self-
experience, where the grounded sense of self is located. Therefore the feeling self remains
unseen and an alien self develops (see Chapter 2 ) based on an overvalued but inaccur-
ately mirrored self-experience, which can become dominant and more firmly established
than the constitutional self.
Self and Other Mentalizing
The process of getting the patient to elaborate their self-experience can be difficult. It is
not an easy task for patients to describe how they see themselves. This is an assessment of
“I-mode ”mentalizing. A direct question such as “What sort of person are you? ”or“How
would you describe yourself to others? ”may work, but requires adequate metacognitive
capacity to be meaningful. Adding examples of personality characteristics can help: “Are
you a confident person or reticent when with others? ”followed by “Can you give an
example? ”Alternatively, the clinician can use a personality descriptor word chart with a
range of descriptors to be indicated by the patient, or the patient can be asked to
complete a structured questionnaire to focus the discussion. For some patients, asking158 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
them to describe how others see them can be even more perplexing. This is an assess-
ment of “me-mode ”(self-as-object) mentalizing. Listen carefully for a sense that other
people fail to appreciate them or to see them as they see themselves. If this elaboration
creates disquiet, frustration, and anger rather than curiosity, self-reflection, and perhaps
self-deprecating acceptance —“what it is to live a life being unappreciated! ”—the clinician
should consider underlying narcissistic functioning.
Context of Narcissistic Activation
Appraising the vulnerabilities of a patient to the activation of narcissistic processes requires
exploration of the circumstances in which they expect to be valued by others only to find
that people do not respond in the anticipated manner. Such triggers are commonly
relational, so the clinician asks specifically about different social and relational contexts
and is alert to how ineffective mentalizing contributes to feelings of disappointment.
Clinical Examples: Relational Activation of Narcissism
You were really quite sensitive to them and noticed how they did not seem to be
appreciating how much you had done and how well you had done it. Tell me more about
that. Can you explain what it was in their reaction that made you realize that they didn ’t
appreciate your efforts? ( Relational activation. )
You spend a lot of time fighting injustice and you often seem to see this going on even
when the person directly affected has not noticed. You say you want to show up the
exploiters for what they really are and show them that what they are doing is wrong. It is
clearly important, but can you tell me a little about how you see your role in this?
(Relational and vicarious mentalizing; inflating self-esteem through superiority to others. )
It really deeply upsets you when you see someone being taken advantage of and they
do not react. It is great that you are able to take up so many causes for other people, but
how does it affect you? ( Relational; automatic mentalizing with self-experience overlapping
with other experience. )
You tell me that not managing something even though you know that it was really
difficult can nag and nag at you and you start feeling that you ’re a failure. Let ’s explore the
expectations you have about yourself a little. ( Vulnerable narcissism activated by self-
expectation and out of line with reality. )
Other triggers generated by ineffective mentalizing may be related to the “how”of
everyday interaction —for example, perceived criticism from others, arguments, being
left out of decision making, or being ignored by people of importance at work or in social
situations are interpreted as disparaging and harmful to the self. Details of the style of
interaction may be necessary in order to get a sense of where the patient ’s mentalizing is
ineffective. The clinician needs to probe about conflict and sensitive reactions.
Sometimes the problems in interactions are more subtle. In smooth everyday inter-
actions, conversations move along easily, with the participants ’dialogue being automat-
ically aligned with each other. Gaps between turns are only milliseconds in duration, as
each respondent predicts the completion of what the other is saying, often with an
accuracy that is astonishing. They do so by mentalizing based on monitoring physical
cues such as body movement, gestures, or tone of voice —the external focus of mentaliz-
ing—which allows them not to be solely reliant on content, but to be sensitive to flow andNarcissistic Personality Disorder 159
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
modulation. We automatically mentalize and, integrating with content, predict when the
person is coming to the end of what they are saying, while balancing our focus on the
other with the preparation of our own content. This smooth reciprocal process may be
disrupted in NPF, as it may be in other personality disorders. In this mode, the
individual is hypersensitive to others ’interruptions and questions, yet fails to self-
monitor, and expects others to listen to them constantly, ignoring cues and giving little
time for the other person to interject. They may be hypersensitive to external cues,
resulting in them reacting too quickly and before the other person has had their say. The
final common pathway of ineffective mentalizing is the absence of reciprocity and the
loss of the “dance ”of a smooth interaction in communication. The clinician should look
out for this in the interactive dialogue during the assessment phase, along with the
sudden activation of dismissive strategies to manage the immediate interaction —for
example, “I am already aware of that ,”“There is nothing new in what you are saying, ”
“I haven ’t come here to listen to some cod psychology, ”or“This is rubbish .”
Focus on Interactive Style in Grandiose/Thick-Skinned
Narcissistic Function
Clinical Examples: Addressing Interactive Style
Hmm. You are certainly good at picking out the mistakes in what I say. Maybe you are right
and I am wrong there, but help me a little —take me through how we got here.
It comes across that you are very certain about your views when talking with me and
others. But let ’s take this last issue. Help me understand how you are so sure about this.
Would you say you were a person who enjoyed a good argument? Tell me about the
argument you had with your friend? It sounds like it was quite engaging for both of you.
Do you often get into conflict at work/home/social events? Let ’s talk about the last time
it happened.
What happens when there is tension between you and others? Are you able to carry on
with other things? Are there times when you become rather preoccupied with it?
Or, more challengingly:
Wow, you are quick to pick up the weaknesses in someone ’s argument. Can you see
their strengths at times?
Narcissistic Expectation and Disappointment
Collapse in narcissistic function is potentially extremely painful, and patients may seek
treatment because they realize that their relationships are not working. An overwhelming
sense of personal despair breaks in if they are unable to shore up their self-esteem by, for
example, blaming someone else for their failure, or dismissing others summarily. The
mental collapse can be sudden and dramatic, like that of Richard Cory in Edward
Arlington Robinson ’s poem, who was looked up to by all and was “admirably schooled
in every grace ”and“thought that he was everything, To make us wish that we were in his
place ”[4]. He went home one night and “put a bullet through his head .”He was not what
he seemed to be, and was a “me”as others saw him but had no central “I.”
“Me”refers to the self-as-object, the self as defined by others ’depictions, or rather
these depictions are seen and felt but experienced “as if”they were the self —the“I”[5].160 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
By definition the “me”is context dependent —it is, after all, a function of the immediate
social environment, which is far from immutable to change, making self-experiences that
originate from within the “me”inherently unstable. Like other approaches, MBT distin-
guishes the “me”from the “I,”with the latter ideally being a coherent representation that
results from the accumulated integration and synthesis of sensory information pertain-
ing to the person through mentalizing. Over time this generates an embodied sense of
personhood with continuous and stable contact with the surrounding world. Under
optimal combinations of nature and nurture the “I”is coherent, robust, and stable. Of
course a dominant “me”—a context-dependent self-experience —can certainly obscure
and may eclipse “I”experiences. In circumstances that compromise the integration of the
“I”(e.g., genetic vulnerability, adversity, deprivation), the “me”becomes the primary
determinant of self-experience, leaving the individual, as in the case of Richard Cory,
alone and suddenly encountering the emptiness of their existence.
Why is this distinction clinically important to bear in mind in relation to narcissistic
function? The lesson for assessment and ongoing treatment in this context is that sudden
changes in risk may not be preceded by the obvious warning signs that are more typical
in people with BPD, who may become more and more emotionally dysregulated and
demanding as their “I”is increasingly experienced as fragmented. In narcissistic func-
tion, the “I”can go from 100 to zero with shocking immediacy with (perceived) changes
in interpersonal context.
The MBT clinician needs to get a picture of the patient ’s need for relationships, as
much as the avoidance of them, by exploring examples from the patient ’s life of when
personal expectations are met and when they are not met. This may expose the chinks
and vulnerabilities in the armor of narcissistic function; it is the patient who needs to
decide whether these are fault lines that need to be repaired. It is not easy for anyone to
recognize their own weaknesses, so the vulnerabilities are best characterized as “excep-
tional sensitivities ”so that the focus does not undermine the patient ’s self-esteem.
Individuals who present with vulnerable thin-skinned narcissistic function, even more
than most, may engage better and are more likely to open an epistemic channel for
learning when feeling empathically validated than when directly challenged. In contrast,
empathic validation in thick-skinned, grandiose narcissistic function will have little effect
because the individual is impervious to others, having created a bubble of self-
importance that isolates them. Individuals in that state experience little need of others ’
affective understanding of their mental states, and may themselves have over-recruited
their cognitive processing systems in order to buttress their self-esteem independent of
their immediate social context.
Elaborating Self-Expectation and Self-Devaluation in
Thin-Skinned Narcissism
Thin-skinned narcissists require mental scaffolding and support. There are many ways to
do this, and again the MBT clinician tries to address the style and process along with the
content —“the how with the what. ”
Clinical Examples: “The How with the What ”
You seem to be putting yourself down a little at the moment. What sort of expectations do
you have about yourself in this context? Where do you think these come from?Narcissistic Personality Disorder 161
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
When you told me that story you sounded like you believed you should have done
better. Tell me of a time when you have done things as well as you had hoped.
You sound quite pleased with how they responded. Were you expecting that? Did it
affect how you felt about yourself?
Wow! They seemed to have appreciated you. How has that affected you?
You have really sensitive antennae for how people say things, and especially if what
they are saying is about you. It is quite hard picking up things so quickly. But perhaps you
are not as sure as you appear to be, because you then seem to go over and over things in
your mind working them out. Can you describe to me what happens and how your
certainty turns to doubt?
Narcissism and Attachment Strategies
In keeping with the generic MBT model, the clinician explores the overarching attach-
ment strategies that are commonly activated in the patient ’s relationships. In contrast to
BPD, in which there is a hyperactivation of attachment processes, individuals with
predominantly narcissistic function may disregard “chat about relationships ”and
actively derogate previous attachment experiences, for example, with their parents:
“My mother was a nobody. It is amazing that so many people turned up at her funeral ;”
“My father never managed to complete anything properly and I soon outgrew his ability to
support me .”Hypoactivation of attachment makes it difficult for the clinician to engage
compassionately in a therapeutic and empathic manner, just as it does for others in the
patient ’s life. Individuals with narcissistic function do not appear to wish to share their
inner states with others, including the clinician. Self-reliance is given priority over need
and dependence. Dismissive and secondary avoidant attachment processes, which are
often activated in response to criticism or lack of appreciation, are commonly associated
with narcissistic function, and this becomes apparent as relationships are explored. There
may be elements of disorganization, too, with the patient presenting opposing states of
mind about a relationship within a short time in the discourse. Lapses in reflective
monitoring result in the contradictions passing unnoticed. Questioning by the clinician
about the coherence of the narrative may lead the patient to become irritable, and
perhaps even to say “You have not been listening. What I said was ...”to justify their
inconsistency. More reflective patients might take more responsibility and say “Did
I really? I wonder why I said that then if I did ,”but then slip into pretend mode:
“Perhaps my mind was on a different phase in the relationship I am describing .”
Further evidence for dismissing strategies as part of narcissistic function (see also
Box 6.2 ) may surface as relationships are elaborated and interactions are scrutinized in
the sessions with the patient.
Box 6.2 What to look out for in dismissive attachment strategies.
/C15Denial of dependency and diminishing a need for help —the patient suggests that they
need a few sessions “just to clarify things .”
/C15Black-and-white thinking —derogation of some relationships and idealization of others.
/C15Overemphasis on personal strengths and achievements.
/C15Lack of coherence in descriptions of a relationship without elaboration: “She was my
closest friend; ”“I could not talk to her .”162 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Outcome of Assessment Process
In keeping with the core model (see Chapter 4 ) all of the information is integrated into
an MBT formulation, which is written as a personalized and non-judgmental summary
of the patient ’s mentalizing profile, their use of ineffective mentalizing modes, and
descriptions of both problematic and effective relational processes. Most importantly,
the clinician and the patient jointly agree the aims of treatment in some detail, and
establish agreed priorities.
Clinical Example: James
James is 27 years old and currently unemployed, having been dismissed by his most recent
employer for insulting and threatening behavior toward his line manager, who had
suggested that a particular piece of work was inadequate and needed revision.
He presented complaining that he felt let down by others and that he did not “suffer
fools, like his boss, gladly, ”and it was this that had got him into trouble. He had read about
MBT and thought he would explore the possibility of it being useful to him.
He started the assessment interview by asking the clinician about his qualifications,
level of training, and expertise. The clinician was completely open about his training and
expertise. James listened carefully and eventually responded by saying “Well, I will reserve
judgment for the time being .”
CLINICIAN :So, get me up to speed about yourself.
JAMES :I am aware that I am going to be difficult to help and that I need an expert rather than a
beginner as I already have extensive understanding of psychology, both my own and others ’.
CLINICIAN :Yes, so tell me about your psychology as you have come to understand it, so I can get up
to speed with how you see yourself.
The clinician places himself in a position of being educated in order to remain non-
threatening. James ’s conceit may cover an easily awakened vulnerability, as suggested
by his reaction to criticism from his employer. The initial assessment is not the time to
confront established NPF. It is the time to evaluate mentalizing vulnerabilities and the
balance of the patient ’s thin-skinned vulnerabilities and their thick-skinned armor.
JAMES :Well, it all begins with my upbringing and my schooling.
James continued with an extensive report about his parental relationships and his adoles-
cent friendships, which were all described as unimportant to him. The clinician ’s responses
were exploratory, using the not-knowing stance of MBT, but framed to give credibility to
James ’s explanations in order not to challenge his narrative. Establishing an alliance is the
most important initial step if shared aims are to be established, and the essential element
of this is that the patient experiences the clinician as attempting to see things from their
point of view.Box 6.2 (cont. )
/C15Dismissal of the clinician ’s perspectives that are not congruent with the patient ’s
own perspectives.
/C15Direct diminishing of the clinician: “Are you a professor? I have waited all this time to see
you and what I get is this garbage. Is this it? A professor? You must be joking .”Narcissistic Personality Disorder 163
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
CLINICIAN :So one challenge for us is to work out how you are going to manage others who do not
have your abilities yet you have to work with them. I will note that down so that we can come
back to it.
CLINICIAN :What about how you get on with people in your social circle and people who you are
particularly close to?
JAMES :How long have you got? This is a complex and interesting story.
CLINICIAN :We can take our time and always come back to it in our next meeting.
Again the clinician is being supportive and interested, and is making sure that he does not
in any way diminish James ’s viewpoint about himself and his life.
After the next session, the clinician informed James that he was going to write
something down to make sure that they were both building the same picture
about treatment.
CLINICIAN :I think the time has come when we need to write something down to see if we are both on
the same page about the work that we have to do. I will have the first go at this so that you can
think about it and let me know where I am getting it right and where I am going wrong. I will
follow the MBT format so that you can decide if MBT is the right way forward for you.
The following week the clinician went through the clinical summary following the
MBT format. He outlined James ’s complex story very briefly, and some of his vulner-
abilities and achievements. Here the sections of the formulation related to James ’s use of
the dimensions of mentalizing are reported, along with the focus on his relationship style
and the problems that might arise in therapy.
Clinical Example: Extracts from James ’s Formulation
Mentalizing
Self and Other Experience
You have told me about how you see yourself and your ability to see things or understand
them more quickly than others, and to some extent that is also the case with your
psychological understanding. You are very sensitive to how others see you, and quite
attentive to how they treat you. In particular you gave me a lot of examples of instances
when people do not respect you enough. When you notice this, and you are quite alert to
it, it can make you angry quite quickly. This happened at work recently. You blame them
for what happened, and we discussed how you manage this sort of misunderstanding. We
agreed that whatever the cause, the situation where others see you differently from how
you see yourself was painful, and you wanted to be able to manage these situations better
than simply getting angry about it.
Perhaps, in our work, we can focus on your sensitivity to others not appearing to see
you as you see yourself. So, first, we can consider your own self-experience. I might
therefore ask you a lot more about your reality and how mismatches occur between your
sense of yourself and others ’impression of you —why people can read you wrong —and
also check out how you see people and if there are times when you also do not see what
they present to you and about you so clearly. All of this will help us to help you cope with
the differences between how you see yourself and how others tend to see you.164 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Cognitive and Affective Function
You are unusually well read about psychology and philosophy given that these are not
your professions, and you are able to focus clearly on working out problems. We agreed
that it was more difficult for you to think and talk about how you feel in almost all
situations, and I suggested that you tended to ignore feelings, dismissing them as weak
and unnecessary.
Perhaps, in our work together, we need to make sure that you are as good at
identifying your own and others ’feelings as you are at analyzing problems. So perhaps
whenever we are talking about “content ”we will also talk about your subjective feeling
alongside that. What are you aware of , rather than what you think ?
Automatic and Controlled Processing
We agreed that you found situations where you were not feeling in control as challenging.
You listen carefully wherever you are and whoever you are with for comments that may be
referring to you, and you work hard to work out what the relationship implications of these
comments are. Although you are incredibly thoughtful about this, all the thinking makes it
hard for you to relax into the interaction. Working things out can stop you being spontan-
eous, although you value that very much, too. You pointed out that when you are with me
you have a constant monitoring in your own mind of whether I am saying something that
indicates that I appreciate you or am criticizing you. I suggested in passing that this was
hypermentalizing —overdoing the thinking. You found this idea interesting but you were
not sure what to do with it.
In our work together, both of us will have to watch out for too much thinking and not
enough living when being with others.
You spend a lot of time thinking about yourself and focusing on your own experience,
and you deservedly enjoy the sense that you are important in your professional world. It is
less helpful, though, when you become preoccupied with how others see you.
In our work together, there will be a tension about how much we focus on your own
world and how much we consider others ’worlds as different from yours. These differences
can bring about a tension in you that leads to you becoming angry and reactive. Although
you feel that is inevitable, we can both see that it would be better to find alternative ways
of managing.
Finally, we worked out that your brain can go into overdrive and become rather “tram-
like”and fixed along a specific line —“people don ’t appreciate me ”and “how is it that I become
caught up with so many f***-wits? ”were a couple of examples. I suggested that this was
“tram-crash ”mode, as calling it “psychic equivalence mode ”is unnecessarily jargonistic.
In our work together, when you are in tram-crash mode you understandably take
action to avoid the crash. We need to find out in much more detail what leads to tram-
crash mode if it is to be avoided.
Relationships
You talked openly about your preference for relationships in which are you are in charge.
Your most recent relationship was with Amanda, whom you found hard to cope with; she
often disagreed with you in front of others, which felt unacceptable. You decided that she
was not for you, and you ended the relationship by phoning her and telling her that you
were ending it and had decided not to see her again. When she tried to contact you to
discuss it, you “ghosted ”her.
This might be difficult for our therapy. I might disagree with you in the course of
therapy, and that may lead you to want to end the relationship with me, too. As you haveNarcissistic Personality Disorder 165
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
already said that you are monitoring me to see if I ’m up to the job, the two of us seeing
things differently might make things a little tense at times. Potentially you may decide that
I am too stupid and it was not worth your while seeing me. It would be a shame if you were
to simply phone me one day and say you are finishing. I am not asking you to commit to
the full year of sessions, but perhaps we could have a pre-therapy agreement that if that
happens we should have two sessions to review what has occurred. I would very much like
to have that agreement at the outset.
Session Focus and Intervention in Narcissistic
Personality Functioning
Modest changes to the basic MBT model described for treating patients with BPD are
recommended in MBT-NPD/NPF. In patients with BPD there is a considerable focus on
managing emotional dysregulation and hyperactivation of the attachment system and
instability of self-function. In meeting grandiose narcissistic function in MBT there is
more focus on establishing an alliance, probing the rigidity of self-structure and the
formulaic representation of others in relation to self, and exploration of the denigration
of attachment relationships. With patients with more vulnerable narcissism there has to be
a considerable focus on the self-affirming needs of the relationship, with frequent empathic
validation. The danger in this situation is of embedding dependency and interminable
treatment. This can be guarded against by time-limited treatment and a gradual move
from empathic –supportive interventions to challenge and a relational focus.
Whatever the mixture of narcissistic function, MBT promotes a safety-first ( “do no
harm ”) approach and the avoidance of iatrogenic interventions (for an outline of the
interventions in MBT-NPD, see Box 6.3 ). MBT-NPD retains the usual MBT focus on
strengthening mental-state representations, in this case largely focused on the mental
states that underpin the self-representations and, later, self-as-object representations. The
principle is to work on establishing clarity about the utility and strength of patients ’“I-
mode ”function first, being empathically validating about their experience of themselves
without challenge. Essentially this is a metacognitive, self-reflective process that is
focused on generating increased coherence of the “I.”Once the therapeutic alliance is
robust, “me-mode ”—which is a combination of first-order mentalizing of others and
personal second-order representation systems that address the “how others see me ”
question —becomes the focus of the treatment. How the patient experiences being seen
by others is key to both types of NPF, and the effective mentalizing of the other lies at the
basis of this capacity, which may not be fully addressed without some challenge being
introduced. This is followed by attempts to establish more detailed work in the “we-
mode ”—that is, relational mentalizing.
Box 6.3 Summary of MBT-NPD.
Assessment and Formulation
/C15Self and other mentalizing —detailed, and focused on self-image and self-esteem.
/C15Exploring the context of narcissistic activation.
/C15Narcissistic expectations and disappointments.
/C15Narcissistic attachment strategies.166 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Supporting Narcissism to Establish an Alliance
The tone of James ’s formulation is highly supportive, and the wording of the formulation
endeavors to take the constructive aspects of his self-aggrandizement by suggesting work
on how he manages a world that is somewhat inferior to him. It is important that the
clinician finds the aspects of the patient ’s self-appraisal that are accurate so that there is an
authenticity to seeing things from the patient ’s perspective. It may be possible to build a
therapeutic alliance by agreeing the working alliance, but the relational alliance can only
come about if the patient experiences the clinician as being alongside them rather than
imposing upon them. Therefore empathic validation is a key intervention in MBT-NPD.
Self-exploration is necessary before any attempt is made to get the patient to meaningfully
consider others ’mind states in any mode other than psychic equivalence (assuming
knowing). This can be problematic for the clinician, who may wish to ask questions about
why the patient thinks others behaved as they did , only to find that the patient has no
curiosity or interest in this (as they are convinced that they know). In addition, the
clinician may find it hard to like a person with strong narcissistic characteristics and
might even quite quickly become antagonistic to them, seeing them as insufferable and
arrogant. Working with such dynamic responses too early in therapy will fracture a fragile
alliance. The use of counter-relational responsiveness is therefore a more dominant feature
later in treatment (see this chapter: Counter-Relational Mentalizing).
Probing Self-Structure and Relational Affect
Exploration of an experiential self is highlighted in the collaborative clinical agreement
with James, who has already accepted that there will be reflection on his self-related
feelings and beliefs. The most straightforward way to focus on this issue is to take a singleBox 6.3 (cont. )
Intervention: From “I-Mode ”to“Me-Mode ”to“We-Mode ”
Vulnerable Narcissism
/C15Empathic validation of and support for “I-mode. ”
/C15Affect focus (subdominant theme) —the patient ’s fears and clinician ’s anxieties are
used as a step to focus on “me-mode ”and “we-mode. ”
/C15Relational mentalizing —identification of anxious dependency.
/C15Counter-relational mentalizing —managing over-supportive/protective responses.
/C15Challenge —beware of this in the context of fragile “I.”
Grandiose/Thick-Skinned Narcissism
/C15Empathic validation of “I-mode ”but less support than in vulnerable narcissism.
/C15Affective narratives to target “me-mode. ”
/C15Affect focus —the patient ’s rigidity and conceit, and how these interfere with
therapeutic work.
/C15Relational mentalizing —identification of dismissive attachment strategies.
/C15Counter-relational mentalizing —managing problematic responses by explicit
identification and discussion.
/C15Challenge —sudden, robust, playful, and direct.Narcissistic Personality Disorder 167
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
episode in which there has been a clear mismatch between James ’s experience of himself
and how others have treated him, building a detailed picture, identifying the differences,
and reflecting on the affect and impressions of the interaction in its wider context.
Clinical Example: Exploration of an Experiential Self
The clinician and James decide to take the most recent “event, ”which had resulted in the
loss of his job. Initially the discussion is about his experience during the event itself. This
then needs to be extended to how he feels about himself now.
JAMES :My intelligence is sharp and that is the main thing that set me apart from the people at work.
They were stupid. I was useful to them until they realized that I was beyond them. They didn ’t like
it as it showed them up for what they are.
CLINICIAN :What are they?
JAMES :Muppets.
CLINICIAN :What was it like for you working with a bunch of muppets, and how do you feel about
it now?
JAMES :Vindicated. It makes me feel it is time for me to move on.
CLINICIAN :Vindicated? In what way?
JAMES :That I was better than them but they didn ’t realize it.
CLINICIAN :As you say that now, is there an emotion that comes alive?
JAMES :Well, I am obviously angry about the way they reacted, as there was nothing wrong with my
work and they told me off in front of everyone in the office.
Now the clinician needs to work more doggedly on the affective experience of James at
this point. He is describing a point of vulnerability.
CLINICIAN :Is it important that this was done in front of other people?
JAMES :Oh yes. If you want to say something to someone that is personal, you shouldn ’t do it in front
of other people.
CLINICIAN :What do you make of that?
JAMES :It was to humiliate me. That was why I walked out.
CLINICIAN :Wow, that is painful. Is that what you felt?
JAMES :Absolutely. Wouldn ’t you?
The clinician now needs to hold the focus and grab James ’s sudden contact with his sense
of shame and humiliation, which made him withdraw and strengthened his rigid and
defensive (but ultimately unsustainable) belief in his superiority. The experience of unmen-
talized shame (experienced with the intensity that psychic equivalence brings) forced
James ’s withdrawal from genuine interaction with others, which might otherwise have
moderated his fragile exaggerated view of himself. Enhancing mentalizing and empathy in
relation to the sense of undeserved humiliation is as far as the clinician is willing to go at
this stage. The experience may be a driver of James ’s overt narcissistic presentation, but of
course simply exposing it could be a humiliation in itself in the moment. This is why the
MBT clinician immediately reverts to an empathic position.168 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
CLINICIAN :Yes, I would. Especially when they see you as the exact opposite to how you are. Managing
the sense of being exposed like that is so hard.
JAMES :I can still see their silly blaming contemptuous faces staring at me. I couldn ’t bear it. I just
walked out.
CLINICIAN :How did walking out make you feel?
JAMES :Better, but then I couldn ’t go back in. I didn ’t know what to do, so I just left.
Toward the end of this session, the clinician and the patient summarize what has been
learned and develop the formulation further as the exploration has led to better under-
standing of the struggle that James faces: “I think what we are learning here is that when
you are faced with people judging you negatively you naturally feel hurt and angry. But the
pain of it is increased if you feel exposed in front of others. You then metaphorically and
physically ‘walk out. ’Of course, then you are on your own and you are thrown on to that
incredible self-sufficiency of yours. That is great, but while you left their blaming contempt
behind, you are also left with the image of their faces, which perhaps makes it harder to feel
good about yourself. How well the self-sufficiency works in relation to that is something we
need to keep in mind as we talk more about all this .”This helps to focus future sessions.
Relational Mentalizing: From “I-Mode ”to“Me-Mode ”to“We-Mode ”
In terms of changes in the intervention over time, exploration of the dynamics of the
patient ’s relationships in their life at present and in therapy itself can bear fruit only once
the patient feels that they are respected and validated by the clinician. Therefore the
structure followed by the clinician in any session at any point in MBT-NPD continues
to follow the stepwise procedure of empathic validation and managing the mentalizing
process first. Only when self-mentalizing metacognition is stable does the clinician con-
sider working on the patient ’s relationships and how they function in the patient ’sl i f e .
Importantly in narcissistic functioning, though, working on stabilizing “I-mode ”
within the therapeutic encounter —primarily seeing things from the patient ’s perspec-
tive—is a necessary first step in treatment. Empathic adoption of the patient ’s perspective
by the clinician helps to clarify and reinforce their understanding of the world in terms of
mental states, even if this entails significant distortion. Next, the vulnerabilities and
difficulties of “me-mode ”functioning —how I see others seeing me (how I am seen by
others) —becomes the subject of sensitive enquiry. The effectively mentalized personal
second-order representation entails seeing oneself through the eyes of others, which
obviously carries risks and dangers. Once this work has traction there can be a move to a
relational focus of “we-mode ”—the joining together of mental states of self and other, in
this instance related to the self, in the spirit of joint intentionality. This entails the
clinician and the patient seeing the same whole person (not just selected parts of the
same person); self-understanding and the understanding of another fully coincide
around the person, with the shared intention of the clinician assisting the patient with
the issue or issues that they are jointly focusing on. Therefore the treatment trajectory
over time in MBT-NPD is as follows:
1. early sessions —focus on stabilizing “I-mode ”
2. middle sessions —emphasis on “me-mode, ”which fades into “we-mode ”
3. later sessions —consolidation and generalization of “we-mode. ”Narcissistic Personality Disorder 169
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Of course this schematic approach is just that —schematic. In practice, the clinician
and the patient will move between all three areas of exploration and focus. However,
remembering that the sessions at the beginning are focused on the metacognitive “I-
mode, ”and that this is followed by work on the self-as-object “me-mode, ”eventually
alighting on the jointly experienced “we-mode, ”grounds the clinician in their tasks. In
the“we-mode, ”the clinician and the patient can jointly attend to personal narratives
while acknowledging that they may have different perspectives of equal validity alongside
a joint vision of an aspect of internal experience to which both are witnesses.
A complication that can arise in NPF is “pretend we-mode. ”For some patients,
particularly individuals with dependent traits, the joining of minds in the “we-mode ”is
appealing and may feel as if it is helping to reinforce a somewhat incoherent sense of self
(“I-mode ”). The clinician needs to be aware that some individuals with marked NPF are
at times prone to depict themselves in the image of the person with whom they are
talking. In social psychology this is described as the chameleon effect ; this effect, which is
likely to be non-conscious, entails a mimicry of lines of thinking, values, expressions, and
even postures, mannerisms, and facial expressions to match those of the conversational
partner. In these instances the “I-mode ”is in a sense masquerading as “we-mode, ”such
that the patient ’s behavior passively and unintentionally changes to match that of the
clinician. The motivation behind this kind of mimicry is likely to be a wish to be liked, as
the“we-mode ”comes with affiliative properties (we tend to like people who are like us).
Just like pretend mentalizing, “pretend we-mode ”may be difficult for a clinician to spot.
Individuals with NPF can be minutely and intuitively attuned to the way the clinician
responds to them, and constantly adapt their own behavior to create an impression of
near-perfect identity. On the whole, masquerading traits are seen by the clinician as
largely positive and even useful, and can be mistaken for epistemic trust. However, the
price the patient pays is that the increased stability of the “I-mode ”is illusory. Real “we-
mode ”does not involve some mystical fusion of minds and perspectives —rather, its
power rests on the fact that it is harnessing different perspectives on the same issue, and
it is dependent on being able to hold on to an awareness of that difference in perspective,
to gain the benefits of different people ’s points of view. Illusory “we-mode, ”on the other
hand, is often characterized by an attempt to be entirely in agreement on the issue at
hand, and a disavowal of different perspectives.
Patients ’vulnerabilities are often more apparent when they are with others.
Interactional mismatches, lack of reciprocity, and inadequate respect all lead to a
hardening of the armored self, reinforcement of narcissistic structures, and a retreat
from others. The clinician opposes this withdrawal whenever possible by highlighting it
when it occurs in the patient ’s life (based on the patient ’s description of events) and when
it happens in sessions. The work is to support the patient to be more involved and
flexible in relationships. The patient ’s experience of the relationship with the clinician
can be used for this purpose if there is adequate epistemic trust (with the patient
perceiving that the meaning of their personal narrative is being mentalized by the
clinician). Alongside the focus on the clinician –patient interaction, it is helpful if one
or more of the patient ’s relationships outside therapy has been carefully explored and has
changed from relational hypoactivation and epistemic dismissal to activation of need and
epistemic vigilance or, better still, has moved toward epistemic trust, with the patient
feeling that there are others in the world who are like-minded and likable, and who like
them. These relationships can be explored safely and the patient can be asked to contrast170 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
their mind states with those of others whom they appreciate may have different perspec-
tives. MBT is concerned not so much with the “why”of the relationships at this point as
with “how”they are used and “how”they function —are they one-sided or do they have a
mutuality that permits patients to learn more about themselves and to become compas-
sionate about others ’experiences?
Counter-Relational Mentalizing
Counter-relational mentalizing needs careful management and particular focus during
the treatment of patients with marked narcissistic function. The patient ’s dismissive
strategies and imperious attitude, and their apparent lack of compassion for and vulner-
ability to others, can become “tiresome. ”The clinician needs to remain grounded and in
contact with the patient ’s vulnerabilities ( “see through the noise and seek the pain ”).
Remaining “with”the patient ’s perspective is essential, albeit at times nigh on impossible;
challenging the rigidity of their mental structure from the motive of compassion is
necessary, although it can easily be taken over by challenging from the motive of
irritation. Rigorous implementation of the not-knowing stance helps with these difficult
counter-responses, but it is the use of the affect focus and presentation of clinician
counter-responsiveness that places pressure on the patient to become more self-reflective
about the dynamics of their relationships.
Affect Focus (the “Elephant in the Room ”)a n dN a r c i s s i s m
The characteristic relational dynamic set up between the clinician and the patient with
narcissistic function has to be identified, lived, and explored. As we outlined in
Chapter 4 , the affect focus is the emotionally salient interactional dynamic between
patient and clinician that is currently being expressed in some way but may not be
verbalized. The dynamic is part of a subdominant theme that often interferes with
treatment and may be implicitly/automatically processed, remaining at a non-conscious
level. It is an “elephant in the room. ”The task in MBT is twofold:
1. to move the subdominant interactional theme from the automatic to the more explicit
2. to explore the dynamic from a point of equity —where participants are part of a
system in which they contribute equally to an interactional process.
To achieve this, the clinician openly identifies some of the dynamic processes as they
become aware of them happening. A major part of this intervention may draw on the
clinician ’s counter-relational experience, which may be the initial indicator of an unex-
pressed emotionally salient process that is relevant to the patient ’s narcissism. For
example, the clinician might notice that everything they say is dismissed and not
reflected on, even though the tone of the patient ’s responses sounds reasonable: “No,
I don ’t think that is right, ”“I don ’t think this is relevant, ”“Perhaps I need to explain this
more .”The clinician feels unappreciated and eventually irritated, as is illustrated by the
next clinical example ( “James ’s elephant ”).
The elephant can be significant in terms of clinical safety and management of risk.
The patient may disavow their risk, but the clinician subjectively experiences a worry —
for example, about suicidality —that becomes increasingly insistent as time goes on. It is
incumbent on the clinician to bring this up and for its significance to be explored: “You
sound very confident about how you would manage such a disappointment. From myNarcissistic Personality Disorder 171
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
perspective I worry a little more than you seem to. You are sensitive to others ’criticism. It
worries me that when I ask you more about it you push me away. I would hate to miss
something important here .”
Clinical Example: James ’s Elephant
The elephants in James ’s treatment were quite problematic. The clinician ’s frustration and
reaction to his arrogance emerged early in treatment. At one point in treatment, James
placed his feet on the low table between him and the clinician. Making himself comfort-
able, he asked the clinician “to try a bit harder to help me understand myself. Most of the
things here so far have been unsurprising to me. It has mostly come from me. I need more
than this from you to change .”The clinician has to consider not only their own counter-
responsive feeling but also the interaction of which it is part. At first, his counter-response
needs to be “quarantined ”while its source is defined.
CLINICIAN :You are right, I think, about needing more. I can see that things are not changing at the
moment. It looks a bit like we are back to that part of our agreement in which there was a
question about how you manage people who do not have your abilities. So perhaps we can think
about how you manage me a bit better at those times when I misunderstand things about you.
JAMES :I was only wanting to be honest about it. I thought that was what I was supposed to be. I have
been coming for nearly four months and I don ’t think I have learned very much from you yet.
CLINICIAN :Yes. I too was thinking about the problem you and I have. To me, we seem to pull in
different directions. I push and pull us around how sensitive you can be to other people, and you
push the other way telling me I am off the point about this. What about an honest discussion
around that?
JAMES :Fine by me. You start. I will listen and then you have to listen to me.
CLINICIAN :Well, as soon as I start to bring up your difficulties with others you seem to me to close off
and I feel that you have made up your mind. I feel you make me out to be wrong before I even
get started.
JAMES :Well, it ’s not quite like ...
CLINICIAN :Hang on a minute, because that is exactly what I mean —I am only just getting started and
we agreed that you are listening at the moment ...But perhaps that is it really —we just don ’t
listen enough to each other with an openness that means we take each other seriously.
The clinician is now trying to define the detail of the “elephant ”and bring it into plain
sight. The aim is to increase the recognition that “not listening to each other ”is a
subdominant dynamic process which is interfering with therapeutic work and the
establishment of epistemic trust. But epistemic trust has to be present if listening is
to be useful as a tool for personal learning and reflection. Currently, James is not listening
to the clinician, and the clinician is finding it increasingly hard to listen to James. The
first step is to define this problem, note it, and jointly identify “not listening ”whenever it
occurs —whether it is James ’s experience of the clinician, or the clinician ’s experience
of James.
Challenge in the context of vulnerable narcissistic function needs to be undertaken
quite sensitively, even tentatively, to avoid triggering shame and intensifying a sense of172 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
failure in the patient, which will compromise mentalizing. In grandiose narcissism, the
challenge should also be sensitively done and carefully timed but it can be less tentative.
Challenge should be avoided when the clinician feels intense annoyance, and should be
deployed only when compassion for the patient dominates. When the therapeutic
alliance is robust, challenge may be more forceful and insistent: “I really cannot get my
mind around the fact that all my attempts to understand your difficulties are a ‘waste of
space. ’You and I need to decide what makes you come to see someone who you regard as so
useless .”This is a high-risk maneuver but it has a chance of freeing up the therapeutic
relationship and triggering a moment of reflection in the patient. The clinician needs to
hold the line while at the same time showing an attitude of wanting to sort out the
problem rather than throwing in the towel and ending the treatment.
Concluding Remarks
In MBT-NPD/NPF, detailed assessment of the self/other dimension of mentalizing is
required, and getting authentic “buy-in ”from the patient about change is a necessary
precondition for therapy. The focus of treatment changes over time, from exploring the
rigidity and vulnerabilities of the “I-mode ”of self to establishing more reflection and
curiosity about the “me-mode, ”or“how others see me. ”A robust sense of self is essential
for joint or relational mentalizing of the “we-mode ”of shared mental states, so that joint
attention can be given to personal narratives while acknowledging that the patient and
the clinician may have different perspectives —both of which have equal validity. If this
point of safe sharing of mental processes with those of others has been arrived at with a
level of stability, the patient ’s narcissism will have been modulated enough to allow
mutuality and a sense of belonging, which are the very foundations of social mentalizing
and friendship making —a positive outcome indeed.
References
1. Skodol AE, Bender DS, Morey LC et al.
Personality disorder types proposed for
DSM-5. J Pers Disord 2011; 25: 136 –69.
2. Tyrer P, Crawford M, Mulder R et al. The
rationale for the reclassification of
personality disorder in the 11th revision
of the International Classification of
Diseases (ICD-11). Personal Ment Health
2011; 5: 246 –59.3. Fonagy P, Gergely G, Jurist E, Target M.
Affect Regulation, Mentalization, and the
Development of the Self . New York, NY:
Other Press LLC, 2002.
4. Robinson EA. Robinson: Poems .
Donaldson S, ed. New York, NY:
Everyman ’s Library, 2007 (originally
published 1897); 33.
5. James W. Principles of Psychology . New
York, NY: Henry Holt, 1890.Narcissistic Personality Disorder 173
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part III
Chapter
6Application and Adaptations for Mental Health
Presentations
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Introduction
Clinicians have become increasingly interested in narcissistic personality functioning
(NPF). Perhaps this is just as well given the earlier threats from the DSM and ICD-11
work groups on personality disorder to remove narcissistic personality disorder (NPD)
from categorical classifications due to the lack of research into the condition [ 1,2]. Taking
a mentalizing approach transcends the issue of category, as it requires the clinician to
assess personality in terms of the dimensional domains of mentalizing, rather than to
establish the presence or absence of specific descriptive characteristics. The details of the
(im)balance of dimensional components that may be creating disruption to the patient ’s
social experience form the center of a more personalized evaluation. Our general prefer-
ence is to avoid labeling where possible and to refer to process and action. Therefore, in
this chapter, for much of the time we refer to NPF, narcissistic functioning, or simply
narcissism, rather than NPD. However, being somewhat inconsistent, we also refer to
mentalization-based treatment (MBT) for NPD (MBT-NPD) to indicate that treating
patients with high levels of narcissism requires modification of the original MBT protocol,
which was developed to treat patients with borderline personality disorder (BPD).
In many ways the mentalizing approach aligns with a common-sense approach often
found in everyday life, where people describe a range of attributes of narcissism when talking
about people they know. Individuals are described in characteristic ways —for example, “full
of themselves ,”“only thinks of himself ,”“she thinks that she is better than everyone else ,”“He is
a show-off, bumptious .”The emphasis is on the person ’s heightened self-regard and self-
image —for example, “They are all self, self, self, with no consideration of others. ”There is
perhaps excess focus on feeling and looking good, in order to impress and be admired by
others. Then there are those who show different aspects of narcissism, described as “some-
what too perfectionistic ”or“too meticulous ”—they spend an excessive amount of time
working on getting something “right, ”being over-particular, and trying to meet mysterious
unachievable standards, only to collapse in a heap and become unable to function when they
fail. There is an essential flaw to all this self-obsession, which becomes apparent when
extreme sensitivity to criticism (real or perceived) leads to reactivity and defensiveness
because it activates the threat of humiliation. Even violence can be used to manage this risk.
The disparate aspects of everyday narcissism have one thing in common —they all
relate to self-esteem and its management. Mentalizing is the manager of self-esteem. In
short, healthy narcissism is the internal management of self-regard and public image
through effective mentalizing. If psychic equivalence, pretend mode, or teleological
thinking (described in Chapter 2 ) start to emerge in relation to how understanding action
155
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
is experienced in self and other, the potential for distorted self-evaluation increases. To
manage self-regard and public image well, we need not only a stable self-experience but
also an ability to use external factors and relationships appropriately to augment our self-
esteem while simultaneously reducing threats that might diminish our positive sense of
ourselves. Ineffective mentalizing undermines these processes. Managing the social envir-
onment in a manipulative teleological mode undermines social relationships. Interpreting
comments or actions by others excessively concretely, in psychic equivalence, makes the
person vulnerable to feeling criticized and devalued. By contrast, detaching from social
experience in pretend mode can exaggerate self-worth and may increase the risk of
grandiosity. Effective mentalizing addresses the reactions of others with curiosity, does
not accept an initial reaction in either the other or the self as real and definitive but as
momentary and liable to change, and, most importantly, is always cautious in relation to
black-and-white thinking, and addresses even positive evaluations with humility and
judicious balance. When ineffective mentalizing dominates, these healthy narcissistic
processes are compromised, the balance of effective mentalizing is disrupted by over- or
underuse of a particular aspect, and natural self-protective narcissism begins to interfere
with intimate relationships with others and distorts social interactions. In the next section
(Assessment and Formulation) we shall describe how this can happen.
Before doing this, we wish to inject a little cautious (mentalizing) humility. We
recognize that MBT is following a long line of therapies and therapists that have tackled
this issue, perhaps better and more effectively than how we suggest here. Our aim is not
to try to rival alternative approaches to supporting individuals who find themselves
struggling with low self-worth or exaggerated self-importance. It is merely to place a
selection of ideas and techniques presented by many brilliant clinical minds in the
context of an MBT formulation and treatment. Along with many who offer such
support, we also believe that when implementing the mentalizing model in clinical
practice it is useful to think about grandiose and vulnerable narcissism, also known as
thick- and thin-skinned narcissism, respectively. The characteristics of the grandiose type
have been well described in the literature, and are summarized in Box 6.1 .
Box 6.1 Characteristics of individuals with grandiose narcissism.
/C15Have an exaggerated sense of self-importance.
/C15Have a sense of entitlement and require constant, excessive admiration.
/C15Believe that they are superior and can only associate with equally special people
(e.g., need to be treated by the head of the clinic).
/C15Expect to be recognized as superior even without obvious achievements.
/C15Exaggerate their achievements and talents.
/C15Are preoccupied with fantasies about success, power, brilliance, beauty, or the
perfect partner.
/C15Monopolize conversations and belittle people whom they perceive as inferior or
a threat.
/C15Expect special favors and unquestioning compliance with their expectations/opinions.
/C15Take advantage of others to get what they want.
/C15Lack empathy.
/C15Are envious of others and believe that others envy them.
/C15Behave in an arrogant or haughty manner, coming across as conceited, boastful,
and pretentious.156 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Many authors believe that these characteristics serve to cover profound feelings of
insecurity and shame and to keep at bay a pervasive sense of inadequacy. Whatever the
merits of this view, the excessive self-regard can become habit forming, “structured into
the personality, ”with little hint of the turbulent waters beneath. Other patients show a
mix of characteristics and are not stable in either their grandiosity or their vulnerability.
Some patients are persistently fragile —this is the person whose experience is dominated
by vulnerable narcissistic function, who may be almost unrelentingly shy, avoidant,
needy, hypervigilant, and sensitive to others ’regard, and whose fragile self-esteem
needs continual top-ups of admiration from others. In all of these presentations the
MBT clinician will readily find the hallmarks of inadequate mentalizing. Social inter-
actions become dangerous if psychic equivalence dominates, and comments that are
possible to interpret as criticism are immediately represented as permanent and as
unchangeable as physical reality. It is hardly surprising that hypersensitivity is the
consequence. By the same token, in psychic equivalence, imagining oneself to possess
exceptional capabilities is as good as actually having them. This impression can, of
course, be bolstered by teleological thinking and organizing those around the individual
to act toward them in a way that confirms their imagined exceptional talent. Pretend
mode removes the tethering that physical reality normally imposes on thoughts and
feelings about what others are actually experiencing, which means that claims can be
made about being loved, admired, and appreciated without the usual requisite evidence
for this in others ’behavior.
Although this presentation is not hard to understand or interpret in terms of
inadequate mentalizing, it creates challenges for the direct application of the techniques
that we have considered thus far in this book. The complexity of the presentation creates
a range of difficulties for the clinician, necessitating some modifications to the MBT
clinical model, which are the subject of this chapter. However, the most important point
to make is that the backbone of the MBT structure remains the same —assessment of
mentalizing, formulation in terms of long-term problems in mentalizing, socializing the
patient to the MBT model, an intervention process that aims to repair ineffective
mentalizing, and ending the process in the way that is most likely to ensure long-
term change.
Assessment and Formulation
Unsurprisingly, assessment of self-function and other representation take priority,
although all of the other components of MBT assessment and formulation are also
required (see Chapter 4 ). The compassionate and non-judgmental stance of MBT is an
absolute requirement during assessment of narcissistic functioning. Enquiry is framed
throughout to give credibility to the patient ’s explanations, to avoid challenging their
narrative. Imagine how humiliating it is for individuals with high ideals and an over-
valued idea of themselves to ask for help, or for those who feel particularly vulnerable
and require admiration from others to feel misunderstood and unwanted by the very
person they are coming to for help. A reaction to the shame experienced with the
intensity of psychic equivalence is likely to blow therapy out of the water by activating
the protective armor of the narcissism, with the clinician being accused of incompetence,
inadequacy, and not being up to the job. Such explosive criticism can easily lead to
formal complaints, a demand to see someone more senior and experienced, and similarNarcissistic Personality Disorder 157
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
time-consuming outcomes, all of which can be avoided with adequate clinician sensitiv-
ity and understanding of the complications of predominantly ineffective mentalizing.
When appraising the patient, the clinicia n is explicit about the aims of the assessment —
that is, to develop a detailed mentalizing profile and evaluate how this impacts on the
patient ’s life. In early iterations of mentalizing theory there were attempts to contrast the
developmental origins of narcissistic and borderline function. It was suggested that in both
conditions there had been a developmental ins ult arising from an imbalance in contingent
marked mirroring from the caregiver. Vulnerability to borderline functioning arose from
the caregiver providing congruent but unmarked mirroring, leading to an unstable self. In
contrast, in narcissistic functioning the opposite was true, with the caregiver providing
marked but incongruent mirroring, leading to a “not-me ”/false self-structure [ 3]. If only life
and development were so simple!
Yet the developmental perspective is a reminder that during assessment the clinician
needs to explore the patient ’s social activity in order to understand whether their
subjective experience is that others are providing adequately marked and contingent
responses to their inner states of mind. In NPF we are more likely to find a person who is
persistently at odds with what they experience as being reflected of them in interpersonal
contexts. Non-contingent or incongruent reflection, which feels like a poor match to
their subjective experience, will leave a person feeling that although the response might
be about them, it does not fully or accurately reflect their subjective (emotional) self. In
the absence of this match they are left feeling non-validated and, if their self-esteem is
particularly low, invalidated. The incongruence or mismatch therefore engenders empti-
ness and a lack of recognition of “true”feeling states, which is a hallmark of vulnerable
narcissistic function. It also leads to isolation and loneliness in the socially interactive
world.
This mismatch is experienced even if the reflection from others is positive. The
essential part is the mismatch of inner state in the timing, valence, or intensity of
reflection from others. Non-contingent parental overvaluation in place of a more
nuanced evaluation of self may have the same effect. The child is seen as superior to
others, more talented, special, and having the right to feel entitled. However, this is the
parental belief about the child and not necessarily the child ’s constitutional self-
experience, where the grounded sense of self is located. Therefore the feeling self remains
unseen and an alien self develops (see Chapter 2 ) based on an overvalued but inaccur-
ately mirrored self-experience, which can become dominant and more firmly established
than the constitutional self.
Self and Other Mentalizing
The process of getting the patient to elaborate their self-experience can be difficult. It is
not an easy task for patients to describe how they see themselves. This is an assessment of
“I-mode ”mentalizing. A direct question such as “What sort of person are you? ”or“How
would you describe yourself to others? ”may work, but requires adequate metacognitive
capacity to be meaningful. Adding examples of personality characteristics can help: “Are
you a confident person or reticent when with others? ”followed by “Can you give an
example? ”Alternatively, the clinician can use a personality descriptor word chart with a
range of descriptors to be indicated by the patient, or the patient can be asked to
complete a structured questionnaire to focus the discussion. For some patients, asking158 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
them to describe how others see them can be even more perplexing. This is an assess-
ment of “me-mode ”(self-as-object) mentalizing. Listen carefully for a sense that other
people fail to appreciate them or to see them as they see themselves. If this elaboration
creates disquiet, frustration, and anger rather than curiosity, self-reflection, and perhaps
self-deprecating acceptance —“what it is to live a life being unappreciated! ”—the clinician
should consider underlying narcissistic functioning.
Context of Narcissistic Activation
Appraising the vulnerabilities of a patient to the activation of narcissistic processes requires
exploration of the circumstances in which they expect to be valued by others only to find
that people do not respond in the anticipated manner. Such triggers are commonly
relational, so the clinician asks specifically about different social and relational contexts
and is alert to how ineffective mentalizing contributes to feelings of disappointment.
Clinical Examples: Relational Activation of Narcissism
You were really quite sensitive to them and noticed how they did not seem to be
appreciating how much you had done and how well you had done it. Tell me more about
that. Can you explain what it was in their reaction that made you realize that they didn ’t
appreciate your efforts? ( Relational activation. )
You spend a lot of time fighting injustice and you often seem to see this going on even
when the person directly affected has not noticed. You say you want to show up the
exploiters for what they really are and show them that what they are doing is wrong. It is
clearly important, but can you tell me a little about how you see your role in this?
(Relational and vicarious mentalizing; inflating self-esteem through superiority to others. )
It really deeply upsets you when you see someone being taken advantage of and they
do not react. It is great that you are able to take up so many causes for other people, but
how does it affect you? ( Relational; automatic mentalizing with self-experience overlapping
with other experience. )
You tell me that not managing something even though you know that it was really
difficult can nag and nag at you and you start feeling that you ’re a failure. Let ’s explore the
expectations you have about yourself a little. ( Vulnerable narcissism activated by self-
expectation and out of line with reality. )
Other triggers generated by ineffective mentalizing may be related to the “how”of
everyday interaction —for example, perceived criticism from others, arguments, being
left out of decision making, or being ignored by people of importance at work or in social
situations are interpreted as disparaging and harmful to the self. Details of the style of
interaction may be necessary in order to get a sense of where the patient ’s mentalizing is
ineffective. The clinician needs to probe about conflict and sensitive reactions.
Sometimes the problems in interactions are more subtle. In smooth everyday inter-
actions, conversations move along easily, with the participants ’dialogue being automat-
ically aligned with each other. Gaps between turns are only milliseconds in duration, as
each respondent predicts the completion of what the other is saying, often with an
accuracy that is astonishing. They do so by mentalizing based on monitoring physical
cues such as body movement, gestures, or tone of voice —the external focus of mentaliz-
ing—which allows them not to be solely reliant on content, but to be sensitive to flow andNarcissistic Personality Disorder 159
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
modulation. We automatically mentalize and, integrating with content, predict when the
person is coming to the end of what they are saying, while balancing our focus on the
other with the preparation of our own content. This smooth reciprocal process may be
disrupted in NPF, as it may be in other personality disorders. In this mode, the
individual is hypersensitive to others ’interruptions and questions, yet fails to self-
monitor, and expects others to listen to them constantly, ignoring cues and giving little
time for the other person to interject. They may be hypersensitive to external cues,
resulting in them reacting too quickly and before the other person has had their say. The
final common pathway of ineffective mentalizing is the absence of reciprocity and the
loss of the “dance ”of a smooth interaction in communication. The clinician should look
out for this in the interactive dialogue during the assessment phase, along with the
sudden activation of dismissive strategies to manage the immediate interaction —for
example, “I am already aware of that ,”“There is nothing new in what you are saying, ”
“I haven ’t come here to listen to some cod psychology, ”or“This is rubbish .”
Focus on Interactive Style in Grandiose/Thick-Skinned
Narcissistic Function
Clinical Examples: Addressing Interactive Style
Hmm. You are certainly good at picking out the mistakes in what I say. Maybe you are right
and I am wrong there, but help me a little —take me through how we got here.
It comes across that you are very certain about your views when talking with me and
others. But let ’s take this last issue. Help me understand how you are so sure about this.
Would you say you were a person who enjoyed a good argument? Tell me about the
argument you had with your friend? It sounds like it was quite engaging for both of you.
Do you often get into conflict at work/home/social events? Let ’s talk about the last time
it happened.
What happens when there is tension between you and others? Are you able to carry on
with other things? Are there times when you become rather preoccupied with it?
Or, more challengingly:
Wow, you are quick to pick up the weaknesses in someone ’s argument. Can you see
their strengths at times?
Narcissistic Expectation and Disappointment
Collapse in narcissistic function is potentially extremely painful, and patients may seek
treatment because they realize that their relationships are not working. An overwhelming
sense of personal despair breaks in if they are unable to shore up their self-esteem by, for
example, blaming someone else for their failure, or dismissing others summarily. The
mental collapse can be sudden and dramatic, like that of Richard Cory in Edward
Arlington Robinson ’s poem, who was looked up to by all and was “admirably schooled
in every grace ”and“thought that he was everything, To make us wish that we were in his
place ”[4]. He went home one night and “put a bullet through his head .”He was not what
he seemed to be, and was a “me”as others saw him but had no central “I.”
“Me”refers to the self-as-object, the self as defined by others ’depictions, or rather
these depictions are seen and felt but experienced “as if”they were the self —the“I”[5].160 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
By definition the “me”is context dependent —it is, after all, a function of the immediate
social environment, which is far from immutable to change, making self-experiences that
originate from within the “me”inherently unstable. Like other approaches, MBT distin-
guishes the “me”from the “I,”with the latter ideally being a coherent representation that
results from the accumulated integration and synthesis of sensory information pertain-
ing to the person through mentalizing. Over time this generates an embodied sense of
personhood with continuous and stable contact with the surrounding world. Under
optimal combinations of nature and nurture the “I”is coherent, robust, and stable. Of
course a dominant “me”—a context-dependent self-experience —can certainly obscure
and may eclipse “I”experiences. In circumstances that compromise the integration of the
“I”(e.g., genetic vulnerability, adversity, deprivation), the “me”becomes the primary
determinant of self-experience, leaving the individual, as in the case of Richard Cory,
alone and suddenly encountering the emptiness of their existence.
Why is this distinction clinically important to bear in mind in relation to narcissistic
function? The lesson for assessment and ongoing treatment in this context is that sudden
changes in risk may not be preceded by the obvious warning signs that are more typical
in people with BPD, who may become more and more emotionally dysregulated and
demanding as their “I”is increasingly experienced as fragmented. In narcissistic func-
tion, the “I”can go from 100 to zero with shocking immediacy with (perceived) changes
in interpersonal context.
The MBT clinician needs to get a picture of the patient ’s need for relationships, as
much as the avoidance of them, by exploring examples from the patient ’s life of when
personal expectations are met and when they are not met. This may expose the chinks
and vulnerabilities in the armor of narcissistic function; it is the patient who needs to
decide whether these are fault lines that need to be repaired. It is not easy for anyone to
recognize their own weaknesses, so the vulnerabilities are best characterized as “excep-
tional sensitivities ”so that the focus does not undermine the patient ’s self-esteem.
Individuals who present with vulnerable thin-skinned narcissistic function, even more
than most, may engage better and are more likely to open an epistemic channel for
learning when feeling empathically validated than when directly challenged. In contrast,
empathic validation in thick-skinned, grandiose narcissistic function will have little effect
because the individual is impervious to others, having created a bubble of self-
importance that isolates them. Individuals in that state experience little need of others ’
affective understanding of their mental states, and may themselves have over-recruited
their cognitive processing systems in order to buttress their self-esteem independent of
their immediate social context.
Elaborating Self-Expectation and Self-Devaluation in
Thin-Skinned Narcissism
Thin-skinned narcissists require mental scaffolding and support. There are many ways to
do this, and again the MBT clinician tries to address the style and process along with the
content —“the how with the what. ”
Clinical Examples: “The How with the What ”
You seem to be putting yourself down a little at the moment. What sort of expectations do
you have about yourself in this context? Where do you think these come from?Narcissistic Personality Disorder 161
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
When you told me that story you sounded like you believed you should have done
better. Tell me of a time when you have done things as well as you had hoped.
You sound quite pleased with how they responded. Were you expecting that? Did it
affect how you felt about yourself?
Wow! They seemed to have appreciated you. How has that affected you?
You have really sensitive antennae for how people say things, and especially if what
they are saying is about you. It is quite hard picking up things so quickly. But perhaps you
are not as sure as you appear to be, because you then seem to go over and over things in
your mind working them out. Can you describe to me what happens and how your
certainty turns to doubt?
Narcissism and Attachment Strategies
In keeping with the generic MBT model, the clinician explores the overarching attach-
ment strategies that are commonly activated in the patient ’s relationships. In contrast to
BPD, in which there is a hyperactivation of attachment processes, individuals with
predominantly narcissistic function may disregard “chat about relationships ”and
actively derogate previous attachment experiences, for example, with their parents:
“My mother was a nobody. It is amazing that so many people turned up at her funeral ;”
“My father never managed to complete anything properly and I soon outgrew his ability to
support me .”Hypoactivation of attachment makes it difficult for the clinician to engage
compassionately in a therapeutic and empathic manner, just as it does for others in the
patient ’s life. Individuals with narcissistic function do not appear to wish to share their
inner states with others, including the clinician. Self-reliance is given priority over need
and dependence. Dismissive and secondary avoidant attachment processes, which are
often activated in response to criticism or lack of appreciation, are commonly associated
with narcissistic function, and this becomes apparent as relationships are explored. There
may be elements of disorganization, too, with the patient presenting opposing states of
mind about a relationship within a short time in the discourse. Lapses in reflective
monitoring result in the contradictions passing unnoticed. Questioning by the clinician
about the coherence of the narrative may lead the patient to become irritable, and
perhaps even to say “You have not been listening. What I said was ...”to justify their
inconsistency. More reflective patients might take more responsibility and say “Did
I really? I wonder why I said that then if I did ,”but then slip into pretend mode:
“Perhaps my mind was on a different phase in the relationship I am describing .”
Further evidence for dismissing strategies as part of narcissistic function (see also
Box 6.2 ) may surface as relationships are elaborated and interactions are scrutinized in
the sessions with the patient.
Box 6.2 What to look out for in dismissive attachment strategies.
/C15Denial of dependency and diminishing a need for help —the patient suggests that they
need a few sessions “just to clarify things .”
/C15Black-and-white thinking —derogation of some relationships and idealization of others.
/C15Overemphasis on personal strengths and achievements.
/C15Lack of coherence in descriptions of a relationship without elaboration: “She was my
closest friend; ”“I could not talk to her .”162 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Outcome of Assessment Process
In keeping with the core model (see Chapter 4 ) all of the information is integrated into
an MBT formulation, which is written as a personalized and non-judgmental summary
of the patient ’s mentalizing profile, their use of ineffective mentalizing modes, and
descriptions of both problematic and effective relational processes. Most importantly,
the clinician and the patient jointly agree the aims of treatment in some detail, and
establish agreed priorities.
Clinical Example: James
James is 27 years old and currently unemployed, having been dismissed by his most recent
employer for insulting and threatening behavior toward his line manager, who had
suggested that a particular piece of work was inadequate and needed revision.
He presented complaining that he felt let down by others and that he did not “suffer
fools, like his boss, gladly, ”and it was this that had got him into trouble. He had read about
MBT and thought he would explore the possibility of it being useful to him.
He started the assessment interview by asking the clinician about his qualifications,
level of training, and expertise. The clinician was completely open about his training and
expertise. James listened carefully and eventually responded by saying “Well, I will reserve
judgment for the time being .”
CLINICIAN :So, get me up to speed about yourself.
JAMES :I am aware that I am going to be difficult to help and that I need an expert rather than a
beginner as I already have extensive understanding of psychology, both my own and others ’.
CLINICIAN :Yes, so tell me about your psychology as you have come to understand it, so I can get up
to speed with how you see yourself.
The clinician places himself in a position of being educated in order to remain non-
threatening. James ’s conceit may cover an easily awakened vulnerability, as suggested
by his reaction to criticism from his employer. The initial assessment is not the time to
confront established NPF. It is the time to evaluate mentalizing vulnerabilities and the
balance of the patient ’s thin-skinned vulnerabilities and their thick-skinned armor.
JAMES :Well, it all begins with my upbringing and my schooling.
James continued with an extensive report about his parental relationships and his adoles-
cent friendships, which were all described as unimportant to him. The clinician ’s responses
were exploratory, using the not-knowing stance of MBT, but framed to give credibility to
James ’s explanations in order not to challenge his narrative. Establishing an alliance is the
most important initial step if shared aims are to be established, and the essential element
of this is that the patient experiences the clinician as attempting to see things from their
point of view.Box 6.2 (cont. )
/C15Dismissal of the clinician ’s perspectives that are not congruent with the patient ’s
own perspectives.
/C15Direct diminishing of the clinician: “Are you a professor? I have waited all this time to see
you and what I get is this garbage. Is this it? A professor? You must be joking .”Narcissistic Personality Disorder 163
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
CLINICIAN :So one challenge for us is to work out how you are going to manage others who do not
have your abilities yet you have to work with them. I will note that down so that we can come
back to it.
CLINICIAN :What about how you get on with people in your social circle and people who you are
particularly close to?
JAMES :How long have you got? This is a complex and interesting story.
CLINICIAN :We can take our time and always come back to it in our next meeting.
Again the clinician is being supportive and interested, and is making sure that he does not
in any way diminish James ’s viewpoint about himself and his life.
After the next session, the clinician informed James that he was going to write
something down to make sure that they were both building the same picture
about treatment.
CLINICIAN :I think the time has come when we need to write something down to see if we are both on
the same page about the work that we have to do. I will have the first go at this so that you can
think about it and let me know where I am getting it right and where I am going wrong. I will
follow the MBT format so that you can decide if MBT is the right way forward for you.
The following week the clinician went through the clinical summary following the
MBT format. He outlined James ’s complex story very briefly, and some of his vulner-
abilities and achievements. Here the sections of the formulation related to James ’s use of
the dimensions of mentalizing are reported, along with the focus on his relationship style
and the problems that might arise in therapy.
Clinical Example: Extracts from James ’s Formulation
Mentalizing
Self and Other Experience
You have told me about how you see yourself and your ability to see things or understand
them more quickly than others, and to some extent that is also the case with your
psychological understanding. You are very sensitive to how others see you, and quite
attentive to how they treat you. In particular you gave me a lot of examples of instances
when people do not respect you enough. When you notice this, and you are quite alert to
it, it can make you angry quite quickly. This happened at work recently. You blame them
for what happened, and we discussed how you manage this sort of misunderstanding. We
agreed that whatever the cause, the situation where others see you differently from how
you see yourself was painful, and you wanted to be able to manage these situations better
than simply getting angry about it.
Perhaps, in our work, we can focus on your sensitivity to others not appearing to see
you as you see yourself. So, first, we can consider your own self-experience. I might
therefore ask you a lot more about your reality and how mismatches occur between your
sense of yourself and others ’impression of you —why people can read you wrong —and
also check out how you see people and if there are times when you also do not see what
they present to you and about you so clearly. All of this will help us to help you cope with
the differences between how you see yourself and how others tend to see you.164 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Cognitive and Affective Function
You are unusually well read about psychology and philosophy given that these are not
your professions, and you are able to focus clearly on working out problems. We agreed
that it was more difficult for you to think and talk about how you feel in almost all
situations, and I suggested that you tended to ignore feelings, dismissing them as weak
and unnecessary.
Perhaps, in our work together, we need to make sure that you are as good at
identifying your own and others ’feelings as you are at analyzing problems. So perhaps
whenever we are talking about “content ”we will also talk about your subjective feeling
alongside that. What are you aware of , rather than what you think ?
Automatic and Controlled Processing
We agreed that you found situations where you were not feeling in control as challenging.
You listen carefully wherever you are and whoever you are with for comments that may be
referring to you, and you work hard to work out what the relationship implications of these
comments are. Although you are incredibly thoughtful about this, all the thinking makes it
hard for you to relax into the interaction. Working things out can stop you being spontan-
eous, although you value that very much, too. You pointed out that when you are with me
you have a constant monitoring in your own mind of whether I am saying something that
indicates that I appreciate you or am criticizing you. I suggested in passing that this was
hypermentalizing —overdoing the thinking. You found this idea interesting but you were
not sure what to do with it.
In our work together, both of us will have to watch out for too much thinking and not
enough living when being with others.
You spend a lot of time thinking about yourself and focusing on your own experience,
and you deservedly enjoy the sense that you are important in your professional world. It is
less helpful, though, when you become preoccupied with how others see you.
In our work together, there will be a tension about how much we focus on your own
world and how much we consider others ’worlds as different from yours. These differences
can bring about a tension in you that leads to you becoming angry and reactive. Although
you feel that is inevitable, we can both see that it would be better to find alternative ways
of managing.
Finally, we worked out that your brain can go into overdrive and become rather “tram-
like”and fixed along a specific line —“people don ’t appreciate me ”and “how is it that I become
caught up with so many f***-wits? ”were a couple of examples. I suggested that this was
“tram-crash ”mode, as calling it “psychic equivalence mode ”is unnecessarily jargonistic.
In our work together, when you are in tram-crash mode you understandably take
action to avoid the crash. We need to find out in much more detail what leads to tram-
crash mode if it is to be avoided.
Relationships
You talked openly about your preference for relationships in which are you are in charge.
Your most recent relationship was with Amanda, whom you found hard to cope with; she
often disagreed with you in front of others, which felt unacceptable. You decided that she
was not for you, and you ended the relationship by phoning her and telling her that you
were ending it and had decided not to see her again. When she tried to contact you to
discuss it, you “ghosted ”her.
This might be difficult for our therapy. I might disagree with you in the course of
therapy, and that may lead you to want to end the relationship with me, too. As you haveNarcissistic Personality Disorder 165
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
already said that you are monitoring me to see if I ’m up to the job, the two of us seeing
things differently might make things a little tense at times. Potentially you may decide that
I am too stupid and it was not worth your while seeing me. It would be a shame if you were
to simply phone me one day and say you are finishing. I am not asking you to commit to
the full year of sessions, but perhaps we could have a pre-therapy agreement that if that
happens we should have two sessions to review what has occurred. I would very much like
to have that agreement at the outset.
Session Focus and Intervention in Narcissistic
Personality Functioning
Modest changes to the basic MBT model described for treating patients with BPD are
recommended in MBT-NPD/NPF. In patients with BPD there is a considerable focus on
managing emotional dysregulation and hyperactivation of the attachment system and
instability of self-function. In meeting grandiose narcissistic function in MBT there is
more focus on establishing an alliance, probing the rigidity of self-structure and the
formulaic representation of others in relation to self, and exploration of the denigration
of attachment relationships. With patients with more vulnerable narcissism there has to be
a considerable focus on the self-affirming needs of the relationship, with frequent empathic
validation. The danger in this situation is of embedding dependency and interminable
treatment. This can be guarded against by time-limited treatment and a gradual move
from empathic –supportive interventions to challenge and a relational focus.
Whatever the mixture of narcissistic function, MBT promotes a safety-first ( “do no
harm ”) approach and the avoidance of iatrogenic interventions (for an outline of the
interventions in MBT-NPD, see Box 6.3 ). MBT-NPD retains the usual MBT focus on
strengthening mental-state representations, in this case largely focused on the mental
states that underpin the self-representations and, later, self-as-object representations. The
principle is to work on establishing clarity about the utility and strength of patients ’“I-
mode ”function first, being empathically validating about their experience of themselves
without challenge. Essentially this is a metacognitive, self-reflective process that is
focused on generating increased coherence of the “I.”Once the therapeutic alliance is
robust, “me-mode ”—which is a combination of first-order mentalizing of others and
personal second-order representation systems that address the “how others see me ”
question —becomes the focus of the treatment. How the patient experiences being seen
by others is key to both types of NPF, and the effective mentalizing of the other lies at the
basis of this capacity, which may not be fully addressed without some challenge being
introduced. This is followed by attempts to establish more detailed work in the “we-
mode ”—that is, relational mentalizing.
Box 6.3 Summary of MBT-NPD.
Assessment and Formulation
/C15Self and other mentalizing —detailed, and focused on self-image and self-esteem.
/C15Exploring the context of narcissistic activation.
/C15Narcissistic expectations and disappointments.
/C15Narcissistic attachment strategies.166 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Supporting Narcissism to Establish an Alliance
The tone of James ’s formulation is highly supportive, and the wording of the formulation
endeavors to take the constructive aspects of his self-aggrandizement by suggesting work
on how he manages a world that is somewhat inferior to him. It is important that the
clinician finds the aspects of the patient ’s self-appraisal that are accurate so that there is an
authenticity to seeing things from the patient ’s perspective. It may be possible to build a
therapeutic alliance by agreeing the working alliance, but the relational alliance can only
come about if the patient experiences the clinician as being alongside them rather than
imposing upon them. Therefore empathic validation is a key intervention in MBT-NPD.
Self-exploration is necessary before any attempt is made to get the patient to meaningfully
consider others ’mind states in any mode other than psychic equivalence (assuming
knowing). This can be problematic for the clinician, who may wish to ask questions about
why the patient thinks others behaved as they did , only to find that the patient has no
curiosity or interest in this (as they are convinced that they know). In addition, the
clinician may find it hard to like a person with strong narcissistic characteristics and
might even quite quickly become antagonistic to them, seeing them as insufferable and
arrogant. Working with such dynamic responses too early in therapy will fracture a fragile
alliance. The use of counter-relational responsiveness is therefore a more dominant feature
later in treatment (see this chapter: Counter-Relational Mentalizing).
Probing Self-Structure and Relational Affect
Exploration of an experiential self is highlighted in the collaborative clinical agreement
with James, who has already accepted that there will be reflection on his self-related
feelings and beliefs. The most straightforward way to focus on this issue is to take a singleBox 6.3 (cont. )
Intervention: From “I-Mode ”to“Me-Mode ”to“We-Mode ”
Vulnerable Narcissism
/C15Empathic validation of and support for “I-mode. ”
/C15Affect focus (subdominant theme) —the patient ’s fears and clinician ’s anxieties are
used as a step to focus on “me-mode ”and “we-mode. ”
/C15Relational mentalizing —identification of anxious dependency.
/C15Counter-relational mentalizing —managing over-supportive/protective responses.
/C15Challenge —beware of this in the context of fragile “I.”
Grandiose/Thick-Skinned Narcissism
/C15Empathic validation of “I-mode ”but less support than in vulnerable narcissism.
/C15Affective narratives to target “me-mode. ”
/C15Affect focus —the patient ’s rigidity and conceit, and how these interfere with
therapeutic work.
/C15Relational mentalizing —identification of dismissive attachment strategies.
/C15Counter-relational mentalizing —managing problematic responses by explicit
identification and discussion.
/C15Challenge —sudden, robust, playful, and direct.Narcissistic Personality Disorder 167
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
episode in which there has been a clear mismatch between James ’s experience of himself
and how others have treated him, building a detailed picture, identifying the differences,
and reflecting on the affect and impressions of the interaction in its wider context.
Clinical Example: Exploration of an Experiential Self
The clinician and James decide to take the most recent “event, ”which had resulted in the
loss of his job. Initially the discussion is about his experience during the event itself. This
then needs to be extended to how he feels about himself now.
JAMES :My intelligence is sharp and that is the main thing that set me apart from the people at work.
They were stupid. I was useful to them until they realized that I was beyond them. They didn ’t like
it as it showed them up for what they are.
CLINICIAN :What are they?
JAMES :Muppets.
CLINICIAN :What was it like for you working with a bunch of muppets, and how do you feel about
it now?
JAMES :Vindicated. It makes me feel it is time for me to move on.
CLINICIAN :Vindicated? In what way?
JAMES :That I was better than them but they didn ’t realize it.
CLINICIAN :As you say that now, is there an emotion that comes alive?
JAMES :Well, I am obviously angry about the way they reacted, as there was nothing wrong with my
work and they told me off in front of everyone in the office.
Now the clinician needs to work more doggedly on the affective experience of James at
this point. He is describing a point of vulnerability.
CLINICIAN :Is it important that this was done in front of other people?
JAMES :Oh yes. If you want to say something to someone that is personal, you shouldn ’t do it in front
of other people.
CLINICIAN :What do you make of that?
JAMES :It was to humiliate me. That was why I walked out.
CLINICIAN :Wow, that is painful. Is that what you felt?
JAMES :Absolutely. Wouldn ’t you?
The clinician now needs to hold the focus and grab James ’s sudden contact with his sense
of shame and humiliation, which made him withdraw and strengthened his rigid and
defensive (but ultimately unsustainable) belief in his superiority. The experience of unmen-
talized shame (experienced with the intensity that psychic equivalence brings) forced
James ’s withdrawal from genuine interaction with others, which might otherwise have
moderated his fragile exaggerated view of himself. Enhancing mentalizing and empathy in
relation to the sense of undeserved humiliation is as far as the clinician is willing to go at
this stage. The experience may be a driver of James ’s overt narcissistic presentation, but of
course simply exposing it could be a humiliation in itself in the moment. This is why the
MBT clinician immediately reverts to an empathic position.168 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
CLINICIAN :Yes, I would. Especially when they see you as the exact opposite to how you are. Managing
the sense of being exposed like that is so hard.
JAMES :I can still see their silly blaming contemptuous faces staring at me. I couldn ’t bear it. I just
walked out.
CLINICIAN :How did walking out make you feel?
JAMES :Better, but then I couldn ’t go back in. I didn ’t know what to do, so I just left.
Toward the end of this session, the clinician and the patient summarize what has been
learned and develop the formulation further as the exploration has led to better under-
standing of the struggle that James faces: “I think what we are learning here is that when
you are faced with people judging you negatively you naturally feel hurt and angry. But the
pain of it is increased if you feel exposed in front of others. You then metaphorically and
physically ‘walk out. ’Of course, then you are on your own and you are thrown on to that
incredible self-sufficiency of yours. That is great, but while you left their blaming contempt
behind, you are also left with the image of their faces, which perhaps makes it harder to feel
good about yourself. How well the self-sufficiency works in relation to that is something we
need to keep in mind as we talk more about all this .”This helps to focus future sessions.
Relational Mentalizing: From “I-Mode ”to“Me-Mode ”to“We-Mode ”
In terms of changes in the intervention over time, exploration of the dynamics of the
patient ’s relationships in their life at present and in therapy itself can bear fruit only once
the patient feels that they are respected and validated by the clinician. Therefore the
structure followed by the clinician in any session at any point in MBT-NPD continues
to follow the stepwise procedure of empathic validation and managing the mentalizing
process first. Only when self-mentalizing metacognition is stable does the clinician con-
sider working on the patient ’s relationships and how they function in the patient ’sl i f e .
Importantly in narcissistic functioning, though, working on stabilizing “I-mode ”
within the therapeutic encounter —primarily seeing things from the patient ’s perspec-
tive—is a necessary first step in treatment. Empathic adoption of the patient ’s perspective
by the clinician helps to clarify and reinforce their understanding of the world in terms of
mental states, even if this entails significant distortion. Next, the vulnerabilities and
difficulties of “me-mode ”functioning —how I see others seeing me (how I am seen by
others) —becomes the subject of sensitive enquiry. The effectively mentalized personal
second-order representation entails seeing oneself through the eyes of others, which
obviously carries risks and dangers. Once this work has traction there can be a move to a
relational focus of “we-mode ”—the joining together of mental states of self and other, in
this instance related to the self, in the spirit of joint intentionality. This entails the
clinician and the patient seeing the same whole person (not just selected parts of the
same person); self-understanding and the understanding of another fully coincide
around the person, with the shared intention of the clinician assisting the patient with
the issue or issues that they are jointly focusing on. Therefore the treatment trajectory
over time in MBT-NPD is as follows:
1. early sessions —focus on stabilizing “I-mode ”
2. middle sessions —emphasis on “me-mode, ”which fades into “we-mode ”
3. later sessions —consolidation and generalization of “we-mode. ”Narcissistic Personality Disorder 169
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Of course this schematic approach is just that —schematic. In practice, the clinician
and the patient will move between all three areas of exploration and focus. However,
remembering that the sessions at the beginning are focused on the metacognitive “I-
mode, ”and that this is followed by work on the self-as-object “me-mode, ”eventually
alighting on the jointly experienced “we-mode, ”grounds the clinician in their tasks. In
the“we-mode, ”the clinician and the patient can jointly attend to personal narratives
while acknowledging that they may have different perspectives of equal validity alongside
a joint vision of an aspect of internal experience to which both are witnesses.
A complication that can arise in NPF is “pretend we-mode. ”For some patients,
particularly individuals with dependent traits, the joining of minds in the “we-mode ”is
appealing and may feel as if it is helping to reinforce a somewhat incoherent sense of self
(“I-mode ”). The clinician needs to be aware that some individuals with marked NPF are
at times prone to depict themselves in the image of the person with whom they are
talking. In social psychology this is described as the chameleon effect ; this effect, which is
likely to be non-conscious, entails a mimicry of lines of thinking, values, expressions, and
even postures, mannerisms, and facial expressions to match those of the conversational
partner. In these instances the “I-mode ”is in a sense masquerading as “we-mode, ”such
that the patient ’s behavior passively and unintentionally changes to match that of the
clinician. The motivation behind this kind of mimicry is likely to be a wish to be liked, as
the“we-mode ”comes with affiliative properties (we tend to like people who are like us).
Just like pretend mentalizing, “pretend we-mode ”may be difficult for a clinician to spot.
Individuals with NPF can be minutely and intuitively attuned to the way the clinician
responds to them, and constantly adapt their own behavior to create an impression of
near-perfect identity. On the whole, masquerading traits are seen by the clinician as
largely positive and even useful, and can be mistaken for epistemic trust. However, the
price the patient pays is that the increased stability of the “I-mode ”is illusory. Real “we-
mode ”does not involve some mystical fusion of minds and perspectives —rather, its
power rests on the fact that it is harnessing different perspectives on the same issue, and
it is dependent on being able to hold on to an awareness of that difference in perspective,
to gain the benefits of different people ’s points of view. Illusory “we-mode, ”on the other
hand, is often characterized by an attempt to be entirely in agreement on the issue at
hand, and a disavowal of different perspectives.
Patients ’vulnerabilities are often more apparent when they are with others.
Interactional mismatches, lack of reciprocity, and inadequate respect all lead to a
hardening of the armored self, reinforcement of narcissistic structures, and a retreat
from others. The clinician opposes this withdrawal whenever possible by highlighting it
when it occurs in the patient ’s life (based on the patient ’s description of events) and when
it happens in sessions. The work is to support the patient to be more involved and
flexible in relationships. The patient ’s experience of the relationship with the clinician
can be used for this purpose if there is adequate epistemic trust (with the patient
perceiving that the meaning of their personal narrative is being mentalized by the
clinician). Alongside the focus on the clinician –patient interaction, it is helpful if one
or more of the patient ’s relationships outside therapy has been carefully explored and has
changed from relational hypoactivation and epistemic dismissal to activation of need and
epistemic vigilance or, better still, has moved toward epistemic trust, with the patient
feeling that there are others in the world who are like-minded and likable, and who like
them. These relationships can be explored safely and the patient can be asked to contrast170 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
their mind states with those of others whom they appreciate may have different perspec-
tives. MBT is concerned not so much with the “why”of the relationships at this point as
with “how”they are used and “how”they function —are they one-sided or do they have a
mutuality that permits patients to learn more about themselves and to become compas-
sionate about others ’experiences?
Counter-Relational Mentalizing
Counter-relational mentalizing needs careful management and particular focus during
the treatment of patients with marked narcissistic function. The patient ’s dismissive
strategies and imperious attitude, and their apparent lack of compassion for and vulner-
ability to others, can become “tiresome. ”The clinician needs to remain grounded and in
contact with the patient ’s vulnerabilities ( “see through the noise and seek the pain ”).
Remaining “with”the patient ’s perspective is essential, albeit at times nigh on impossible;
challenging the rigidity of their mental structure from the motive of compassion is
necessary, although it can easily be taken over by challenging from the motive of
irritation. Rigorous implementation of the not-knowing stance helps with these difficult
counter-responses, but it is the use of the affect focus and presentation of clinician
counter-responsiveness that places pressure on the patient to become more self-reflective
about the dynamics of their relationships.
Affect Focus (the “Elephant in the Room ”)a n dN a r c i s s i s m
The characteristic relational dynamic set up between the clinician and the patient with
narcissistic function has to be identified, lived, and explored. As we outlined in
Chapter 4 , the affect focus is the emotionally salient interactional dynamic between
patient and clinician that is currently being expressed in some way but may not be
verbalized. The dynamic is part of a subdominant theme that often interferes with
treatment and may be implicitly/automatically processed, remaining at a non-conscious
level. It is an “elephant in the room. ”The task in MBT is twofold:
1. to move the subdominant interactional theme from the automatic to the more explicit
2. to explore the dynamic from a point of equity —where participants are part of a
system in which they contribute equally to an interactional process.
To achieve this, the clinician openly identifies some of the dynamic processes as they
become aware of them happening. A major part of this intervention may draw on the
clinician ’s counter-relational experience, which may be the initial indicator of an unex-
pressed emotionally salient process that is relevant to the patient ’s narcissism. For
example, the clinician might notice that everything they say is dismissed and not
reflected on, even though the tone of the patient ’s responses sounds reasonable: “No,
I don ’t think that is right, ”“I don ’t think this is relevant, ”“Perhaps I need to explain this
more .”The clinician feels unappreciated and eventually irritated, as is illustrated by the
next clinical example ( “James ’s elephant ”).
The elephant can be significant in terms of clinical safety and management of risk.
The patient may disavow their risk, but the clinician subjectively experiences a worry —
for example, about suicidality —that becomes increasingly insistent as time goes on. It is
incumbent on the clinician to bring this up and for its significance to be explored: “You
sound very confident about how you would manage such a disappointment. From myNarcissistic Personality Disorder 171
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
perspective I worry a little more than you seem to. You are sensitive to others ’criticism. It
worries me that when I ask you more about it you push me away. I would hate to miss
something important here .”
Clinical Example: James ’s Elephant
The elephants in James ’s treatment were quite problematic. The clinician ’s frustration and
reaction to his arrogance emerged early in treatment. At one point in treatment, James
placed his feet on the low table between him and the clinician. Making himself comfort-
able, he asked the clinician “to try a bit harder to help me understand myself. Most of the
things here so far have been unsurprising to me. It has mostly come from me. I need more
than this from you to change .”The clinician has to consider not only their own counter-
responsive feeling but also the interaction of which it is part. At first, his counter-response
needs to be “quarantined ”while its source is defined.
CLINICIAN :You are right, I think, about needing more. I can see that things are not changing at the
moment. It looks a bit like we are back to that part of our agreement in which there was a
question about how you manage people who do not have your abilities. So perhaps we can think
about how you manage me a bit better at those times when I misunderstand things about you.
JAMES :I was only wanting to be honest about it. I thought that was what I was supposed to be. I have
been coming for nearly four months and I don ’t think I have learned very much from you yet.
CLINICIAN :Yes. I too was thinking about the problem you and I have. To me, we seem to pull in
different directions. I push and pull us around how sensitive you can be to other people, and you
push the other way telling me I am off the point about this. What about an honest discussion
around that?
JAMES :Fine by me. You start. I will listen and then you have to listen to me.
CLINICIAN :Well, as soon as I start to bring up your difficulties with others you seem to me to close off
and I feel that you have made up your mind. I feel you make me out to be wrong before I even
get started.
JAMES :Well, it ’s not quite like ...
CLINICIAN :Hang on a minute, because that is exactly what I mean —I am only just getting started and
we agreed that you are listening at the moment ...But perhaps that is it really —we just don ’t
listen enough to each other with an openness that means we take each other seriously.
The clinician is now trying to define the detail of the “elephant ”and bring it into plain
sight. The aim is to increase the recognition that “not listening to each other ”is a
subdominant dynamic process which is interfering with therapeutic work and the
establishment of epistemic trust. But epistemic trust has to be present if listening is
to be useful as a tool for personal learning and reflection. Currently, James is not listening
to the clinician, and the clinician is finding it increasingly hard to listen to James. The
first step is to define this problem, note it, and jointly identify “not listening ”whenever it
occurs —whether it is James ’s experience of the clinician, or the clinician ’s experience
of James.
Challenge in the context of vulnerable narcissistic function needs to be undertaken
quite sensitively, even tentatively, to avoid triggering shame and intensifying a sense of172 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
failure in the patient, which will compromise mentalizing. In grandiose narcissism, the
challenge should also be sensitively done and carefully timed but it can be less tentative.
Challenge should be avoided when the clinician feels intense annoyance, and should be
deployed only when compassion for the patient dominates. When the therapeutic
alliance is robust, challenge may be more forceful and insistent: “I really cannot get my
mind around the fact that all my attempts to understand your difficulties are a ‘waste of
space. ’You and I need to decide what makes you come to see someone who you regard as so
useless .”This is a high-risk maneuver but it has a chance of freeing up the therapeutic
relationship and triggering a moment of reflection in the patient. The clinician needs to
hold the line while at the same time showing an attitude of wanting to sort out the
problem rather than throwing in the towel and ending the treatment.
Concluding Remarks
In MBT-NPD/NPF, detailed assessment of the self/other dimension of mentalizing is
required, and getting authentic “buy-in ”from the patient about change is a necessary
precondition for therapy. The focus of treatment changes over time, from exploring the
rigidity and vulnerabilities of the “I-mode ”of self to establishing more reflection and
curiosity about the “me-mode, ”or“how others see me. ”A robust sense of self is essential
for joint or relational mentalizing of the “we-mode ”of shared mental states, so that joint
attention can be given to personal narratives while acknowledging that the patient and
the clinician may have different perspectives —both of which have equal validity. If this
point of safe sharing of mental processes with those of others has been arrived at with a
level of stability, the patient ’s narcissism will have been modulated enough to allow
mutuality and a sense of belonging, which are the very foundations of social mentalizing
and friendship making —a positive outcome indeed.
References
1. Skodol AE, Bender DS, Morey LC et al.
Personality disorder types proposed for
DSM-5. J Pers Disord 2011; 25: 136 –69.
2. Tyrer P, Crawford M, Mulder R et al. The
rationale for the reclassification of
personality disorder in the 11th revision
of the International Classification of
Diseases (ICD-11). Personal Ment Health
2011; 5: 246 –59.3. Fonagy P, Gergely G, Jurist E, Target M.
Affect Regulation, Mentalization, and the
Development of the Self . New York, NY:
Other Press LLC, 2002.
4. Robinson EA. Robinson: Poems .
Donaldson S, ed. New York, NY:
Everyman ’s Library, 2007 (originally
published 1897); 33.
5. James W. Principles of Psychology . New
York, NY: Henry Holt, 1890.Narcissistic Personality Disorder 173
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part III
Chapter
7Application and Adaptations for Mental Health
Presentations
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Introduction
There is considerable overlap between the psychological profile of antisocial personality
disorder (ASPD), narcissistic personality functioning (NPF), and borderline personality
disorder (BPD) [ 1,2]. It is well known in clinical practice that many patients show
characteristics of all three disorders. People with ASPD have high levels of NPF, and
many individuals with BPD have high levels of antisocial traits, serving as a reminder
that the categorical approach to personality disorder is not quite fit for purpose. The
failure of categorization is not, however, an argument against having some general
principles that help to distinguish between clinical presentations, because these presen-
tations indicate that different forms of therapeutic intervention are required for the
patient ’s needs to be met effectively. Thus in this chapter we shall use the term ASPD
(and refer to patient and clinician, although the attitude we promote is one of equality),
but we refer to ASPD not as a diagnostic entity but rather as an indicator of individuals
who have a shared set of problems, which mentalization-based treatment (MBT) can
address with a particular set of interventions, which we shall describe as MBT-ASPD.
Importantly, individuals diagnosed with ASPD, who are more commonly male, show a
persistent failure to manifest generalized prosocial behavior and to engage in construct-
ive social collaboration; this leads to repeated conflict with society, formation of distrust-
ful friendships, and problematic intimate relationships.
The Long- and Short-Term Aims of MBT with ASPD
Changing Identity and Achieving Desistance
As we discussed in Chapter 2 , what is relevant for good outcomes from MBT is that social
communications containing information relevant to the individual ’s ability to function in
social collaborative contexts are useful as a resource for the individual to learn from. This
information about how to work in the social world is then available to be used in more
complex social environments, even against a background of stress and in non-mentalizing
environments. Thinking about how to communicate is particularly relevant to working
with people with ASPD, as they can be so distrustful of others that they fail to see the
personal relevance of communication that in others might prompt changes in a person ’s
identity, tastes, values, or preferences. They often find it harder to recognize positive
opportunities and pathways for change, as they are stuck in a pattern of survival in what
may be —and what they certainly experience as —a hostile world, which they manage
through threat and violence. In this context, it is unsurprising that they find it hard to
174
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
change. Desistance from violence itself, as demanded by criminal justice systems (and
often used as a primary outcome in studies of treatment), is experienced by them as defeat.
But the process that moves us all toward desistance is the relevant factor.
The process is actually about change in the perceived relevance of information to the
self—a cognitive transformation from perceiving the world as a hostile place from which
nothing can be learned, to perceiving it as a place from which learning becomes possible.
Desistance occurs through the recognition, normally through others, of the negative
attributes of a criminal identity and the gradual enhancement of the patient ’s subdominant
prosocial identity. An offender ’s identity changes as a function of receiving new infor-
mation that they consider relevant to them and generalizable to other settings, and
therefore to be stored for future activation through modification of self-structures. Only
then can we talk of the person as having, in a metaphorical sense, “broken with the past. ”
A new self is progressively formed. New information, once it has been absorbed and
integrated into relevant self-schemas, means that views of the world are altered and things
that once mattered now do not (or they matter much less), and things that did not matter
before now do (or they matter slightly more). Importantly, this process of change, driven
by increasingly stable mentalizing, has compelled us to pay far more attention to the social
context of our patients and the ongoing relationships that dominate the lives of offenders,
and to directly address issues of trust and mistrust in the context of these relationships.
Therefore in ASPD the primary emphasis of c hange is not so much on the clinical setting
and the recovery of mentalizing capacity, but rather on enabling changed social relationships
between the individual with ASPD and the peo ple around them. The work is to support the
patient in becoming more open to information and knowledge from others that they
previously were disinclined to accept as pertinent to them (i.e., relevant ), and enabling them
to apply this information to settings beyond the one in which it was encountered (i.e.,
generalizable ) and integrate it with and modify exis ting knowledge structures (i.e., memorable ).
As epistemic trust (see Chapter 3 ) increases, the individual gradually becomes better inte-
grated into the social network around them. This l eads to increased learning opportunities for
permanently modifying self-narratives, and this in turn leads to a reduction in the frequency
with which violence-instigating social strategies are used at times of stress and distress.
In summary, change —that is, desistance from violence —depends on a combination
of three critical influences:
1. the enhancement of mentalizing, which brings about
2. a reduction in antisocial behavior (e.g., violence) through enhanced concern with the
experience of others and improved social connections characterized by epistemic
trust, which in turn enables
3. prosocial agents to exercise influence on the individual ’s personal narrative, leading
to persistence of change.
The starting point for generating this process is carefully curated group treatment
with an emphasis on mentalizing, engagement in treatment and facilitation of trust in
others, practicing “live”prosocial interactions, and generalizing the learning from these
interactions to the individual ’s personal social context.
Mentalizing and Violence
This book has persistently emphasized that the starting point in MBT for the clinician
involves mapping the mentalizing problems of the patient and defining the contexts inAntisocial Personality Disorder 175
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
which their mentalizing is vulnerable, with a particular focus on social and interpersonal
sensitivity when attachment strategies are activated. It is at these times that the patient ’s
mind is vulnerable to the dominance of the low-mentalizing modes —psychic
equivalence, teleological mode, and pretend mode (see Chapter 2 ). A rapid,
attachment-dependent movement between these different modes of experiencing the self
and the world is characteristic of BPD, but is modified by the co-occurrence of violence
in ASPD. People with ASPD interpret the world according to teleological understanding
(“doing ”mode) for much of the time, and work on the basis that action is the only way
to make people understand something, or to ensure that a threat to the self is neutralized.
We suggest that this process maintains stability through the rigidity of the external-
ization of the alien self (see Chapter 2 ). This presents serious problems for the clinician
who is working with the patient. The rigidity of the system has to be challenged, and yet
the challenge might induce violence [ 3,4].
In ASPD the alien self is firmly and rigidly externalized. A partner may be portrayed
as mindless and dependent, and therefore needing to be told what to do; a social system
may be portrayed as authoritarian and threatening subjugation. Threats to these sche-
matic representational structures —for example, a partner demanding an “unacceptable ”
level of independence —create a mismatch with expectation, leading to attachment
anxiety. This triggers the inhibition of mentalizing, which in turn leads to fears of
inability to control internal states and the threat of the return of the alien self. It is
important for the clinician to remember key processes that can destabilize a carefully
crafted system which is stabilizing an alien self. These are:
/C15threats to self-esteem
/C15threats to self-identity
/C15activation of shame.
Threats to self-esteem trigger violence in individuals whose self-esteem is not rooted
in reality because they exaggerate their self-worth (narcissism; see also Chapter 6 ) and
risk being seen differently by others. People with ASPD tend, at a superficial level, to
inflate their self-esteem, demanding respect from others, controlling the people around
them, and creating an atmosphere of fear. To a large extent this is adaptive within their
social milieu, and to do anything different would open them up to personal danger.
However, they throw the baby out with the bathwater. Their distrust of others is
wholesale, and no information from the social world is available to them to learn from.
Change requires them to notice glimmers of prosociality and maximize them to develop
constructive, cooperative relationships. Many individuals with ASPD try to do this —they
continually try to protect their relationships with their partner and children, only to find
that these are disrupted by external threats that challenge their position and identity (e.g.,
as a father or head of the household). Loss of status is devastating, as the alien self returns
and reveals internal states that threaten to overwhelm them. Experience becomes more
firmly rooted in psychic equivalence, which adds intensity and reality to the situation of
(perceived) loss of status, leading to a need to “sort things out. ”The problem is seen not
as mental but as arising from the physical world, and so, in teleological mode, the person
takes physical action. Access to emotions such as guilt, love for others, and fear for a
physical self —which can prevent many of us from engaging in violent behavior —is not
available, and the loss of mentalizing, along with the reduced ability of individuals with
ASPD to experience such feelings, prevents the mobilization of such inhibitory176 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
mechanisms. For example, fear for the survival of a physical self is absent, and the
ordinary dangers associated with violence are discounted. The onset of pretend mode
means that the risk of being caught is “unreal, ”and an illusory sense of safety and lack of
reality prevails. The internal state no longer links with external reality: “It happened like
in the movies, ”“It didn ’t seem real .”
The regulation of shame is a key factor in this process [ 5]. The return of the alien self
induces feelings of shame, which are experienced in the reality of psychic equivalence,
and so attempts to control the source, which is seen as “out there ”—external to the self —
are inevitable. Aggression toward the source of danger is not limited to non-physical
aggression (e.g., shouting), as this would require awareness of the mental state of the
other, which is lost when mentalizing breaks down. Retaining an ability to imagine
someone else as a human being with a separate mind inhibits violence. It is the loss of
mentalizing that allows a physical attack, as the other person becomes no more than a
body or a physical threat. So it is to the subject of violence that we now turn in order to
understand in more detail this final element of a complex picture.
The common path to violence is via momentary inhibition of the capacity for
mentalizing. As we mentioned earlier, mentalizing protects against engaging in violence.
Some individuals fail to desist from violence throughout childhood and adolescence, and
appear to be constitutionally poor at using external mentalizing processes to accurately
recognize the underlying mental states of others through their facial expressions or tone
of voice. These individuals are commonly described as “callous and unemotional ”or
considered to be “psychopaths ”who are unaffected by others ’responses. For most of us,
eliciting a painful state in others activates concern and leads to a change in our behavior.
However, this does not occur in these individuals. It is likely that their nascent capacities
for mentalizing were eroded by cruel and traumatic experiences in early life, or by an
attachment figure who had persistent thoughts, attitudes, and responses that created
considerable anxiety in the child, as a result of which these individuals avoid thinking
about any subjective experience of others. Therefore in MBT it is important to retain an
awareness of the possibility that violence may be rooted in the disorganization of the
attachment system. A child may display an apparent callousness that is actually rooted in
anxiety about attachment relationships, and not simply constitutional. They are not
really callous and unemotional, but terrified and striving for a more reliable attachment
that they never seem to be able to create. A harsh early childhood signals greater future
need for interpersonal violence as a means of expressing underlying mental states.
Violence becomes the currency for expression of the self and the management of
relationships. In support of this model, studies have demonstrated that the association
between childhood maltreatment and externalizing problems is probably mediated by
inadequate interpersonal understanding (social competences) and limited behavioral
flexibility in response to environmental demands (ego resiliency) [ 6].
We argue that patients whose aggression was high in early childhood and continued
into adolescence and early adulthood are likely to have had attachment experiences that
failed to establish both a robust yet flexible sense of self-agency and a stable experience of
the other as a psychological entity [ 7]. There is an interplay between psychological
defenses, neurobiological development, and shifts in brain activity during post-traumatic
states that leads to compromise of mentalizing activity. The shift in the balance of
cortical control locks the person with a history of childhood maltreatment into a mode
of mental functioning associated with:Antisocial Personality Disorder 177
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
/C15an inability to employ alternative representations of the situation (i.e., functioning at
the level of primary rather than secondary representations)
/C15difficulties in explicating the state of mind (meta-representation) of the person whom
they face
/C15a predisposition to use modes of mental functioning associated with states of
dissociative detachment, where their own actions are experienced as unreal or as
having no realistic implications.
These issues must all be addressed in treatment.
Preparation for the MBT Group for Patients with ASPD
To achieve the aims of learning from others, learning about oneself through others, and
creating a different experience of self, unencumbered by the previously fragile but heavily
protected rigid self, the MBT group for patients with ASPD (MBT-ASPD-G) attempts to
create a social environment with core values that are agreed between all the participants,
and sensitively constructs interactions that promote reflection between participants.
As such, there are some specific areas of MBT for patients with ASPD that need special
attention in clinical practice [ 8,9]. These include:
/C15the format of treatment
/C15engagement: addressing equality versus hierarchy; discussion of personal values
/C15formulation: collaboration without stimulating threats to self-esteem (humiliation)
/C15reflection on personal agency
/C15identification by patients of emotion in self and others
/C15empathic concern for and interest in others
/C15elaboration and management of shame as a destabilizer of self-function
/C15considering aggression and violence as a catastrophic loss of mentalizing
/C15moving from hierarchical relationships to collaborative “we-mode ”functioning.
Format of Treatment
Individual sessions are offered initially for assessment and engagement. Once the
formulation has been agreed, the patient is offered MBT-ASPD-G. Individual sessions
are offered only if requested by the patient and for specific purposes, which may include:
/C15change in the risk to self and/or others
/C15escalation of problem areas (e.g., drug/alcohol use); co-occurring conditions (e.g.,
depression); lying; excessive externalization
/C15non-attendance at group sessions and requiring support to remain in the group
/C15exploration of sensitive personal material
/C15work on symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder
/C15discussion and agreement about reports to be written by the clinician (e.g., in relation
to child custody decisions or court proceedings)
/C15reformulation.
MBT-ASPD centers around group work. In keeping with the mentalizing principle
that an individual is more likely to listen to and learn from others whom they see as the
same as them, everyone in the group has ASPD, and most will have had repeated brushes
with the criminal justice system and feel abandoned by, and to a measure excluded from,
society. From a mentalizing perspective, we assume that if people feel mentalized —that178 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
is, they experience that their concerns and emotional states have been accurately and
compassionately reflected on from their perspective by another person, whom they see as
similar to themselves —this may allow them to experience a sense of belonging and
engagement in social processes that support mentalizing and also reduce their mental
and social isolation and sense of epistemic injustice. Recovering mentalizing serves to
reduce their background experience of social danger, which easily provokes violence, and
improves their level of empathy, which has hitherto been lacking and has further enabled
aggressive or violent antisocial acts. Recovering mentalizing also reinstates interpersonal
connections and opens a channel for social learning, facilitating change in how they see
themselves and how they interact with others.
Engagement in Treatment
Individuals with ASPD are very often highly sensitive about being seen as people who
have mental health problems. In psychic equivalence (Inside-Out) and teleological mode
(Outside-In) thinking, they see others as causing them problems. They don ’t even like
the term “mentalizing, ”hearing only the “mental ”part (as in “You must be mental! ”).
Engagement starts with the referrer, who needs to frame the referral carefully, making
the reason for it relevant to the individual. The patients who readily agree to referral
(MBT-ASPD is not offered as part of court-ordered mandatory treatment plans) may be
those who feel depressed and want help. A common situation is that they are concerned
about being portrayed as dangerous by a former partner or an organization such as social
services, housing services, or the child protection team, and this portrayal is damaging for
their lives. They may be described by authorities as a “bad influence ”who should not, for
example, be allowed access to their children, and their history of violence is used as
evidence to support the credibility of a harsh decision. Few of us would portray ourselves
as a bad influence, and being seen by others in a way that they do not see themselves leaves
individuals with ASPD feeling misunderstood and further alienated from society and a
social system with which they do not engage fully. As far as their teleological thinking is
concerned, their actions have been a reasonable response to others ’failure.
At the initial interview, “treatment ”is usually far from the patient ’s mind; at the
forefront is garnering support in their argument with authorities, for example, to get
social support restored or to improve the access they have to their children. Only if they
experience MBT as a route to achieving their personal goal will they attend “therapy ”—
which for most, at this point, is a “pretend ”therapy. Changing pretend therapy into
engaged personal therapy is the challenging function of the initial sessions. The difficul-
ties in engaging patients with ASPD are distinct from those involved in the engagement
of patients with BPD and some other categories of personality disorder, where patients
commonly seek treatment for themselves and actively try to engage with their aim of
improving a state of distress and anticipating feeling better in a supportive relationship.
Process of Engagement in Treatment: Summary
The key features of the MBT approach to the engagement of individuals with ASPD are
as follows.
/C15Accept the person ’s stated practical aim.
–Do not try to establish your own psychological and behavioral aims —for example,
to support them in stabilizing mentalizing in the face of everyday stresses, to
reduce violence and aggression, or to support prosocial behavior.Antisocial Personality Disorder 179
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
–As far as possible, the MBT clinician attempts to be open-minded, affirms the
patient ’s motivation for wanting to join the group, and monitors the development
of the therapeutic alliance to slowly present behavioral and psychological aims.
/C15Be ordinarily human and use a not-knowing stance. Do not make any assumptions
or judgments.
/C15Empathically validate the patient ’s feeling of alienation and exclusion; recognize the
annoying and distressing nature of being misunderstood by others.
/C15Collaboratively develop the content and focus relevant to the patient in the help being
offered (which should notbe identified as “treatment ”).
/C15Include an expert by experience who has completed treatment in the MBT-ASPD
program to aid engagement (experts by experi ence are described later in this chapter).
Clinical Example: Bryan
Bryan, who is 24 years old, was referred because of his persistent threats of violence. His
history of previous violence included attacking his partner and threatening her brother
during an argument about access to their two children, aged 4 and 6 years. His partner had
taken out a court injunction to stop him visiting the family home because of his threats. He
was currently living with his father and mother in what was described as a home “full of
threat, ”with his father constantly belittling him as a “pathetic specimen of a man. ”
In his account of his earlier life, Bryan stressed that his father had been involved in a
criminal gang and was the enforcer for collection of “protection ”money. If people did not
pay their protection money, threats were issued. The consequences of non-payment
included physical punishment. He was included in his father ’s money-collecting circuit
from the age of 8, and by 12 years of age had become an expert in “kneecapping ”using a
crowbar. He reported that he had stopped all of this activity when he left prison two years
ago, and refused to join his father in any criminal activity. His main occupation was going
to the gym and weight training.
At the initial assessment he said he was present only because he needed a report to
say that he was safe to see his children. This led to the following conversation:
CLINICIAN :Let’s talk about that. What are we to write in the report? Perhaps tell me about your
children first and what they are like.
BRYAN:They are my children.
CLINICIAN :Yes. I was wanting to get a picture of what they are like and then perhaps how you are as
well. Tell me about Jimmy, who is now 6 years old.
To some extent this initial approach has links with the MBT Loop (see Chapter 4 )
used by MBT clinicians to address low mentalizing. The aim of the initial interview is to
turn around the mental telescope and change a narrow, circumscribed view or demand
into a wider perspective (i.e., “zoom out ”) before bringing back specific concerns into
focus for more consideration (i.e., “zoom in ”). Therefore, as the content of the report is
discussed in detail, the clinician sensitively moves back and forth from the exploration of
the patient ’s understanding of his children (e.g., why it is important for them to see him)
to how he sees himself as a father (e.g., why it is important for him to see the children
more often). This movement has the potential to generate exploration and stimulate180 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
some self –self and self –other reflection. How are the children described? Are they people
with character and personality (reflective mentalizing) or people whom it is the patient ’s
“right to see as the father ”(low-mentalizing description and demand)? In this case, the
patient ’s response was a low-mentalizing response and had no elements personal to his
son. Therefore the clinician presses the patient to consider how he sees his children as
individuals with their own needs and attributes.
Eventually, the clinician can consider how the patient is seen by others ( “me-mode ”
or personalized other –self mentalizing). His partner and her brother have banned him
from the home, and he rails against this. To address the idea of “how I am seen by
others, ”it is best to start by finding out what the patient thinks about another person,
before asking how the other person sees them.
Clinical Example: Bryan (continued)
CLINICIAN :How would you describe your partner when you were with her —not so much as you see
her now, but when you were together with her and your children?
BRYAN:She has changed. She was always very jumpy and sometimes would attack me, but the social
services don ’t care about that, do they? I only hit her when she had attacked me. But before we
had children she could be really nice and did things for me when I asked, and she visited me
in prison.
CLINICIAN :Tell me more about her jumpiness.
After some exploration of this description of Bryan ’s former partner, the clinician conver-
sationally moves to how she might have seen him.
CLINICIAN :How did she see you before things began to break down?
Formulation and Addressing Equality Versus Hierarchy
Bryan described a relationship with his partner that oscillated between her being dutiful
and biddable, which he liked, and her being jumpy and aggressive toward him, which he
did not like. He agreed that he managed this by being threatening and controlling to
some extent, and that his partner often complained about him being a “control freak. ”
Toward the end of the meeting, it was possible to identify that he felt comfortable when
he was “the boss, ”but uncomfortable when the people he was with “did their own thing. ”
The clinician at this point attempted to mentalize the developing relationship between
himself and Bryan: “You know, when you say that, I realize that when you came to this
session you were the boss and rightly so, telling me that you wanted the report and that
I had to provide it. What is it like now that we have agreed to wait a bit before it is done? ”
This relationship dynamic, variously described in the initial meetings as “Boss/
Servant, ”“Demand/Compliance, ”“Control/Controlled, ”and “Superior/Inferior, ”was
outlined in the written summary of the meeting that the clinician made with Bryan
toward the end of the session. Bryan ’s pleasure at being seen as a “boss ”suggested that
his self-esteem is increased by such an image of himself. Therefore the clinician made a
mental note to support rather than challenge this image in the service of generating an
alliance early in treatment.Antisocial Personality Disorder 181
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Jointly writing the summary of the meetings and giving patients open access to all
written information is an essential element of equality, and is necessary to reduce the
patient ’s level of distrust in the assessment and treatment process.
Clinical Example: Written Summary/Formulation for Bryan
We have discussed the way that people see you and your concern that this is wrong and
based on your previous behaviors. You want us to work to write a report that supports your
access to your children. I have said that I don ’t know whether any report will do that until
you and I have worked on how that might happen —on who and what has to change.
I realize that this is uncomfortable for you at the moment, as it challenges that Boss/
Servant thing when you feel in control. We know that you are angry at times in relation to
this. This comes from experiencing people as not respecting you and not taking you
seriously, or doing things without discussing them with you. You feel good about yourself
when people respect you and see you as someone to look up to, so we need to be aware
of that. When you are not taken seriously you react, as you are excluded and people aren ’t
listening to your point of view. This happened with your partner and led to you asserting
yourself, which she and her brother called threats. We also agreed that at times, when you
get angry, you are “in your own world. ”
You are coming into the group to meet others who have similar concerns in their lives,
and you will use this summary to introduce yourself. The important part is that you expect
people to listen to you and respect you, and you will find that the others have the same
expectations. So we will ask you to tell them about your current situation when you start. In
the meantime we will have some sessions together about how the group works.
One value we have agreed about our meetings is openness/transparency —we will
discuss everything that comes to mind, and there will be no contact with the Child
Protection Team or your probation officer without your knowledge.
This straightforward summary is the first part of the formulation, written with the
aim of easing Bryan into the group and ensuring that the focus of the work is on his
relationships and emotional reactivity. Additional elements related to the mentalizing
dimensional profile are added during individual sessions before starting the group.
Patient entry into the group follows the same procedure as that described in Chapter 5 .
Discussion of Values before Joining the Group
The clinician explores the patient ’s values before they join the group by asking a number
of questions about personal topics. For example:
1.Do other people think that there are some things that should be important to you, such
as not getting angry so easily, taking time before you feel in control, being less quick to
boil over into violence, having loving relationships, or being employed? Are any of these
things important to you, even if you think people are judging you unfairly? ”The
patient has to consider the focus of treatment to be meaningful to them personally .I t
is not possible to engage people with ASPD in treatment if they feel that the focus is
important to society but not to them.
2.Is this “value ’”still important if nobody knows about it and if nobody would judge you?
This question is used to ensure that the person is motivated by a wish to be different,
rather than by external pressure to conform.
3.Is it important to you even though it might not play a role in your current life?182 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Exploration around these questions enables the clinician and the patient to address
personally important concerns as well as to generate longer-term aims. In the end, the
clinician and patient consider together how the patient would like to be, rather than how
they are. Gradually they build a focus for treatment and jointly identify goals. These goals
should have a broader focus than preventing aggression/violence, which is seen as an end
product of a cascade of problems, rather than the focus for therapeutic work, which must
be the mentalizing problems that lie behind the actions. Patients with ASPD often
complain that they are seen as “angry people ”and sent to anger management classes,
which merely serve to make them feel stereotyped and misunderstood.
Other strategies for engaging and retaining patients in MBT groups include:
/C15actively calling the participants following missed sessions
/C15texting all of the participants on the day of the group or the day beforehand,
whichever is agreed with the patients, to encourage them to attend
/C15providing refreshments for them before the group session starts
/C15having a flexible policy regarding non-attendance; fostering curiosity and
understanding about the reasons why patients might not be willing or able to attend,
rather than adhering to a more rigid procedure of discharging them after a certain
number of missed sessions
/C15maintaining participants ’trust by establishing clear and transparent guidance in
relation to confidentiality
/C15using individual sessions to address issues that are impeding attendance at the
group, which may relate to negative feelings and attitudes toward other group
participants.
MBT-ASPD-G
MBT-I for MBT-ASPD-G
The initial group work in MBT-ASPD-G is psychoeducational. The patient learns about
the mentalizing framework that will be followed during treatment. Central themes of the
forthcoming work are discussed in MBT-Introductory Group (MBT-I) sessions, which
follow the same structure as that used for patients with BPD (see Chapter 4 ).
In MBT-ASPD, the content of the MBT-I sessions is modified to some extent. The
discussion about mentalizing, emotions, attachment, and relationships is very similar,
but the clinician uses examples that are relevant to the patients. In addition, an extra
module is included that links violence and other antisocial behavior to loss of
mentalizing.
Mentalizing Modules
In the mentalizing modules, the clinician seeks to get the patients to:
1. consider their self-esteem and the basis on which they appraise it ( “I-mode ”)
2. appraise the level of concern about others and what they think and feel ( “me-mode ”)
3. identify how others see them ( “personalized me-mode ”)
4. recognize when they “lose their mind, ”and in what way —Boom Time/Know and
Now/Inside-Out (psychic equivalence), Action Man/Doing Time/Inside-Out
(teleological mode), or Bubble Mode (pretend mode)
5. identify “we-mode ”function —safety in intimacy and sharing.Antisocial Personality Disorder 183
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Emotions Module
In the emotions module, discussion about s hame as an emotion is necessary. There is some
emphasis on aggression, too, but this is considere d as a basic emotion required for survival; it is
presented as a secondary response to environmental frustrations r ather than a trait characteris-
tic that is untreatable. The clinician uses everyday examples of situations that can trigger all of us
to be angry, and explains how anger can be activated when shame is emerging —what happens
when we are laughed at or criticized in front of others and feel humiliated, or when we are
forced/coerced to do something against our wishes, so that we feel diminished, or when we
make someone else do something against their wishes and later realize that we were cruel. At
this point it can be helpful to ask the group me mbers to begin to think about their own values
and whether there are examples from their lives when they did not meet their personal standard.
Attachment Module
In the attachment module the relational patterns of each group participant are identified,
without judgment or comment. These relational patterns will already have been dis-
cussed with each participant in their formulation. The aim here is to pick out the
patterns and to note them as something that will be explored in treatment from the
point of view of their helpful and harmful consequences. Which relationships are
supportive and why is this so? Which are unhelpful and go against the person ’s long-
term wishes? What creates the problem?
Violence Module
The violence module provides a brief outline of the ways in which interpersonal violence
can be thought about —that is, “emotional explosion ”versus “plotting and planning. ”
The patients are asked if they can categorize their own actions and give examples of
them. They are asked not to judge themselves and not to judge anyone else in the telling
of personal examples. Most examples will be related to emotional violence, so the
clinician draws out the detail of the cascade toward non-mentalizing, identifying the
participants ’experience of themselves, their experience of others ’motives, and what
feelings that experience provokes in them that they find unacceptable and unbearable.
Violence is the outcome of a loss of mentalizing, and some of the information that we
outlined at the beginning of this chapter is discussed in this module.
One way of focusing and personalizing some of the discussion is to use the Overt
Aggression Scale Modified (OAS-M) [ 10] in the group, as this requires each patient to think
about their verbal, physical, and self-aggressi on as well as their propensity to damage property.
Finally, an agreement is made that whenever violence or unconstructive social
interaction occurs it should become a topic of discussion in the group. Is desisting from
violence as the primary solution to their problems a value that they can sign up to? If not,
why not? If so, why? The first question does not have to be answered affirmatively for the
person to continue in the group. It aims to stimulate reflection among group members
about the effects of antisocial behavior on their lives and what might change or be lost by
them increasing their prosocial behaviors.
Meeting an Expert by Experience
Experts by experience —patients who have completed MBT-ASPD treatment —are
employed within normal clinical confidentiality contracts to provide information and184 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
to discuss the program with new patients. The expert by experience sits in MBT-ASPD-G
sessions and contributes to the discussions, often helping to clarify the focus for the
sessions. This arrangement is in keeping with the mentalizing principle that new patients
are more likely to accept information from and listen to those who they know have had
similar experiences to themselves. In this context, epistemic vigilance is lowered and
learning is increased. Experts by experience tend to be more direct toward patients than
clinicians are —for example, telling new patients that they “have to work on themselves ”
or asking them “Do you want to turn your life around? ”They emphasize that motivation
has to come from within and that “it is no good looking to everyone else to do things for
you.”Nevertheless, they are also aware of the difficulties faced by new patients, as they
themselves often struggled for many years to turn their lives around.
There may be some side effects of the work of experts by experience to watch out for.
Some experts by experience can be overly strict and censorious, or excessively directive —
for example, one insisted that all members of the group should leave their mobile phones
in a bucket when they came into the room, and told them that they were there to interact
and think about themselves together, away from the world outside! This is taken into
account in the brief training program that the experts by experience complete before they
begin their work.
Other experts by experience can become over-involved, sharing their phone numbers
or even visiting patients at home. To guard against these problems, it is important that
the expert by experience is a fully incorporated member of the MBT clinical team and
not simply an add-on. They come to team meetings once a week and are paid to do so. At
these meetings patients are discussed, with the perspective of the expert by experience
being given the same weight as the opinions of the rest of the team. This working
relationship between experts by experience and clinicians requires attention from the
treating team. Creating a place for the expert by experience in the team and generating
an atmosphere of equality and mutual respect may have beneficial effects on the way that
the team works, and in turn on how the group functions. Experts by experience are often
more sensitive to the mental struggle of patients than the MBT clinicians are, and so they
have the task of helping the clinicians to understand their patients better. They have to
bridge the gap between the mental processing of the clinicians and that of the patients,
nudging the group toward “we-mode ”functioning in which all of the participants
consider a problem from separate but overlapping perspectives, which is a complex task.
Structure of the Group and Focus on Self-Agency in the Group
MBT-ASPD-G follows the standard MBT-G framework (see Chapter 5 ), but with greater
emphasis on the generation of agreed values and additional structure.
Agreed Values
The agreed values, such as openness, tolerance, and respect, are best written on a
whiteboard or flip chart in the group room. Any individual value that is agreed between
a patient and clinician in the assessment phase is included in the list of values for the
group once it has been discussed by the group. The list serves as a reminder to group
members and clinicians alike of what has been agreed, and may be referred to during the
group when the “rules ”are broken or when it is apparent that they are being adhered to
in a prosocial way. The aim of establishing agreed values in an explicit way and ofAntisocial Personality Disorder 185
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
referring to them during the group is for those values to become gradually embedded in
automatic mentalizing processes within the group, creating the potential for a prosocial
culture. Whenever a value is broken, this is called out by a group member, the expert by
experience, or the clinician, and the group is asked to revisit the value and to discuss it
again on the basis that breaking agreed values is an antisocial attitude that needs to be
addressed. The key is learning from, rather than reacting to, an infringement of the
joint agreement.
Self-Agency
Self-agency sounds promisingly self-explanatory as a statement about an individual ’s
capacity to act as a free agent and to exercise their free will. Yet it is curiously complex to
target and enhance by clinical intervention. The clinician and patient need to follow a
framework. In essence, self-agency has two main mentalizing elements. First, there is the
ability to conceive of one ’s self in the moment on the basis of a coherent personal
narrative that is normative and provides a sense of personhood even when under threat.
Second, there is a time distinction in which there is a psychological connection estab-
lished between a past self, activated through the retrieval of positive and negative
memories holding personal values and experience, and a future self, which shares and
elaborates that past. Bringing the two together allows the individual to become a “doer ”
within their current context, and so create an ongoing future and a life worth living that
is continuous with the past. Thus it is inevitable that improving mentalizing will increase
self-agency due to continuity between self in the past, self in the present, and self in the
future. Working on this triad of content of self-mentalizing allows shared reflection on
the complexity of relationships partly because having a more robust self-agency reduces
defensiveness and self-protection through dismissal of others.
How the exploration of the present, past, and future self in relationships takes place
in the group is discussed with the patients before they enter the group.
I-Mode to Me-Mode
The group participants are asked to organize around “I-mode ”to“me-mode ”and
initially from present to past and past to present in any discussion of their personal
experiences and events: “If this is me now, where did ‘I’come from? If this was me then,
what does it mean for me now? ”There is an interplay between autobiographical and
semantic memory processes.
This is followed by asking all of the other participants to talk together about their
experience of what they have heard and what it means for them, not solely what it makes
them think about the person who was presenting. After this, the discussion moves back
to the presenter, who considers whether or not the “me-mode ”interaction has changed
their “I-mode ”reflection and, if so, in what way.
Clinical Example: Bryan (continued)
CLINICIAN :Bryan, what we are going to ask you to do is to take some of your problem areas and
openly talk about them from your point of view ( I-mode ). The others in the group are asked not to
judge or give advice about what you or anyone else should have done, but just to ask you
questions that help you to elaborate and express the feelings associated with what you are186 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
talking about, what was difficult for you to navigate in terms of how you felt, what you were
struggling with, and how you feel about it all now. So, for example, if you are discussing your
problems with your partner, they will ask you what it is that she was saying or doing that made
you react, what that brought up in you and how you expressed it, and what you think she was
seeing in you. Everyone will then be asked to reflect on what your story means to them, and you
are asked to listen to see if this brings up other things about you and your story.
Recognition of and Reaction to Others ’Emotional States
People with ASPD make excessive use of automatic assumptions about others ’mental states,
and are slow to switch to controlled mentalizing in order to understand others ’motives and
their underlying emotions. They have a reduced ability to recognize facial and vocal cues and
the associated underlying emotions in others; this includes recognition not only of negative
emotions, such as anger, fear, disgust, and sadness, but also of positive emotions, such as
surprise and happiness. As a result, others ’responses may be a puzzle to them. In addition,
they are often concerned that others may express something outwardly but that this is “fake”
and inconsistent with what they feel inside. In effect they are distrustful of others ’emotional
expression. They are especially suspicious of people who seem helpful and inclusive, as this
challenges their schematic and automatic representations of the world —for example,
someone may appear pleasant but this covers a malign and exploitative state of mind.
These patients ’level of epistemic mistrust is high, and so they are wary even of pleasantness
and expressions of trustworthiness. Differentiating between congruent and incongruent
inner and outer expression requires practice in everyday life. Enhancing this process starts in
the group, using the group interaction as a training ground for social discourse that uses the
automatic/controlled mentalizing dimension in the service of recognizing emotional states
in others and confirming what states of mind lie behind them.
Clinical Example: Bryan (continued)
CLINICIAN :Let me give you an example —as I say this to you, you look a little puzzled and rather
suspicious. But that is my reading of your mind as I observe your face and how you are looking at
me. It makes me feel uncertain about what I am saying. I may be quite wrong, and so I will ask
you—are you a bit suspicious of what I am suggesting we do in the group, and, if so, what makes
you so suspicious?
BRYAN:I can ’t see the point of it.
CLINICIAN :Ah, so is my assumption about your reaction correct?
BRYAN:Not really.
CLINICIAN :So tell me what is behind your expression. What was in your mind?
BRYAN:I don ’t know, but all this makes me think I don ’t want to be told that I have to ask people in
the group what they are feeling.
CLINICIAN :Can you get hold of what is uncomfortable about that?
BRYAN:Not sure.Antisocial Personality Disorder 187
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
CLINICIAN :Well, the main reason we focus on it is that all of us often make assumptions about each
other ’s feelings and motives that turn out to be inaccurate, like you have found that the
authorities have got you wrong. Right? ( Bryan nods. ) We make these immediate judgments about
each other all the time. The authorities judged you to have a harmful state of mind, and based
this on how you behaved, but you think they got that wrong. In this group, we practice how good
we can be at reading each other and how accurate we can become. Often we get it wrong. That
is how we learn about our blind spots, which are often fueled by how we feel in the moment,
while at the same time practicing how to ask what is beyond our immediate guess.
BRYAN:Hmm. OK.
Working with Shame as a Problematic Emotion
Shame is a multifaceted, complex emotion that involves disgust, anger, and anxiety and
is often associated with behavior changes, such as withdrawal and avoidance of others.
Shame has a “self”and an “other ”component, with a negative experience of oneself,
perhaps for not meeting one ’s internal standards, allied with a belief that others will see
and judge the experience equally negatively and want to punish us severely. Shame elicits
a concern about social rejection and a wish to distance oneself from the perceived trigger,
whether this is interpersonal (something being seen by someone) or mental (something
being thought or imagined). There may be a fine balance between internal and external
shame, or it may be excessively weighted to one side or the other. Internal shame focuses
on self-experience, and individuals become preoccupied with their own negative evalu-
ation of themselves. This is less common in ASPD than external shame, in which
individuals are more concerned with how they are seen by others. Worrying that they
might be diminished in the eyes of others, they become preoccupied with changing
others ’minds, either by behaving differently themselves or, more often, by coercively
demanding that the other person sees them differently —hence the sudden anger toward
an individual who elicits feelings of shame in them. It is all too easy for a clinician to
become judgmental about a patient ’s actions and in doing so trigger a shame reaction of
anger and/or avoidance in the patient, who may then behave in a threatening manner or
leave the session. In MBT-ASPD-G, patients can activate shame in each other, and the
clinician has to be constantly aware of potential shame reactions, which may create
explosive interactions and require immediate de-escalation (de-escalation of problematic
or threatening interactions is described later in this chapter).
In patients with ASPD, shame may be persistent yet unrecognized by the individual,
who is more concerned with deactivating relationships and avoiding emotion altogether
than they are with managing their shame more constructively. Shame is not the same as
guilt, which by definition is vestigial in people with ASPD. Guilt requires a recognition of
having done something wrong, and it leads to efforts to right the wrong, often driven by
empathy for the person who has been wronged and the wish to repair the social rupture.
Persistent shame shows itself by the individual becoming excessively sensitive to others ’
states of mind and inferring all sorts of negative evaluations by others because of overuse
of the external dimension of mentalizing.
There are several things that the clinician can do to make shame a more accessible
theme and less of an “elephant in the room. ”188 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
1.Identify and normalize shame as an everyday human emotion —that is, name it and
note it —in the MBT-I meetings. Use everyday examples: “Sometimes when someone
sees us unable to do something that we think we should be able to do we become angry
with them and force them to try, hoping that they will fail, too .”
2.Explore examples in the MBT-I modules and in MBT-ASPD-G sessions when a
patient reports that they have a negative self-evaluation.
3.Ask other patients in the group what they think of a participant who is describing
something about himself. Their response is more often compassionate
than condemning.
4.Maintain the non-judgmental, not-knowing stance of MBT when exploring
potential shame, and use an empathic “we-mode ”focus: “Something flashed across
your mind there, I think. Sometimes we can feel badly about ourselves in circumstances
like this. How were you feeling about yourself when you were talking about that? ”The
tone of the clinician ’s intervention and their body language are important here, as the
patient will be overfocused on non-verbal cues. The “we”component must be
authentic, and for this to be the case the clinician needs to identify with the shame to
some extent.
5.Explore prototypical shame events if the patient can manage this, and identify
their mental approach and reaction to it. Do they want to change their reaction, live
with it, or hide it as best as they can? If change is important, how can that occur?
Perhaps they need to be able to express the shame to others while simultaneously
maintaining self-compassion rather than activating self-criticism. Recognizing how
compassionate another person can be toward them and realizing how condemning
they are toward themselves can be a game changer.
Future Self
Identifying how patients see themselves in the future and what they now want to change
in themselves is an important discussion to have in the initial formulation and then in
the group. The group discusses the topic together as part of the discussion of values:
“Where do we see ourselves in the future? What do we want to get out of our lives? What
sort of social and personal roles do we have, and how would we like them to change? ”
Patients may be overambitious about themselves or have impractical ideas, and the main
aim in the group is for them to consider how comfortable they feel about themselves and
their reactions to others in relationships. For example, it is more in keeping with the
aims of MBT-ASPD-G to seek a personal future as a more demonstrably loving person as
opposed to an unloving and unlovable person, or as someone who can be assertive but
not aggressive.
Pretend Mode
MBT-ASPD-G sessions often begin with a discussion between participants that is
couched in pseudo-philosophical-political language about how awful the system is, and
how no one can be trusted. The discussion is in the context of a jointly held belief system
that lacks connection to reality. In essence, this is pretend mode. However, contrary to
the principle of always addressing pretend mode as soon as it is present, the clinician
leaves the conversation until there is a natural lull, only then starting the session
by linking back to the previous week. This opening can be considered as “chat mode, ”Antisocial Personality Disorder 189
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
and it serves the useful purpose of bringing a sense of unity to the group. However,
pretend mode that arises during the group session needs to be addressed in the
normal way.
Working with Anger as a Problematic Emotion
Clinical Example: Anger as a Problematic Emotion
“I asked the barman for a drink very politely. He ignored me and carried on standing there and
did not even look at me. I asked him again politely. When he ignored me again, I picked up the
glasses on the bar and threw them at the mirror behind him. You cannot allow yourself to be
treated like that. ”
This story contains within it many of the features associated with antisocial violence.
The violence is as sudden as it is unexpected, and arises in the context of an interpersonal
threat to self-esteem, with the narrator being, in their view, diminished, unseen, and
disrespected. When treating people with ASPD, it is important that the clinician sees
behind the act of aggression and does not become distracted by it. It is all too easy to focus
on the drama and miss the psychological pain behind the action. As a rule of thumb, the
clinician should assume until it is proven otherwise that the internal states most feared by
people with ASPD are threats to self-esteem. As we have already discussed, people with
ASPD inflate their self-esteem by demanding respect from others, controlling those around
them, and even creating an atmosphere of fear. This maintains pride, prestige, and status —
there is evidence in the world around them of their status, and people ’s behavior toward
them matches their self-appraisal. Loss of status is devastating if experienced in psychic
equivalence, as a new reality of a weak and diminished self emerges, revealing disavowed
shameful internal states that threaten to overwhelm the person. Therefore any threat of loss
of status becomes firmly rooted as a dangerous reality that has to be dealt with by physical
force. A momentary inability to mentalize —to see behind the threat to what is in the mind
of the person who is apparently threatening them —means that they have no way of
keeping out a rapidly falling self-esteem and loss of position.
Clinical intervention in the group when exploring events follows the MBT affect
trajectory (see Chapter 4 ) with a specific focus on the events leading up to the violence.
Just as a patient who has engaged in self-harm is asked to review the events and the
mental states associated with the act (see Chapter 4 ), so the patient who is violent is asked
to consider in the group the events and mental states surrounding the violence. The
group members are asked to:
1. explore the feelings and experiences of the narrator as the situation developed at
the time
2. ask about the narrator ’s reflection on what was happening at the time, looking back at
the event
3. enquire about the narrator ’s experience in the group while they are telling the story
4. consider their own reactions to the story and what they can learn from it.
Common Clinical Problems in MBT-ASPD-G
This section outlines some common clinical problems associated with treating patients
with ASPD.190 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Recruitment to a Cause
Patients with ASPD recruit each other to their “cause. ”A cause is often related to how
unfairly an organization or individual has treated them —for example, unfairness in the
social benefits they receive, or failure of the probation service to provide effective help.
The discussion between participants focuses on the failures and defects of the people
within the organization. In talking about their problem, the narrator gradually recruits
other members of the group to their cause and, in doing so, the group members organize
themselves in support of the “victimized ”group member and demand that the group
leaders get something done about the problem.
Recruitment to a cause is a common pathway to pretend mode within the group.
A single perspective emerges —unsurprisingly that of the protagonist, who now has
widespread justification for their grudge —and all are agreed that someone else needs
to do something. The task of the clinician is to halt this spiral into pretend mode by
actively managing the group process.
Clinical Examples: Recruitment to a Cause
Example 1
A patient discussed how the local authority housing department had not dealt with his
application for a flat in the way that he wanted. He had asked whether a medical officer
had assessed his application. He was told that a senior housing manager had seen the
application and that it was not being sent to the medical officer because this was deemed
unnecessary. At this point the patient told the housing officer that they were not doing
their job properly and threatened them, telling them he was coming to the department to
“sort them out. ”
In response, another patient said that the housing department never did its job
properly and the people there were only interested in themselves. He agreed that they
needed “sorting out. ”Gradually this exchange developed into a discussion between all the
members of the group about how people in the housing department were incompetent
and useless. Many examples were given. Finally, the group turned to the clinicians leading
the group, who were told that they needed to write to the housing department to get
something done about it all.
Example 2
A patient reported that he had stabbed someone, not fatally, but to “wound and warn. ”He
had allowed his flat to be used for meetings of a local gang, of which his nephew was a
senior member. He told them that he wanted them to leave as it was late. The gang leader
had been using some drugs and responded by saying that they would leave when he was
ready and when he wanted to. In response, the patient gave him a 10-minute warning and
then a 5-minute warning. When the leader did not appear to be leaving, the patient went
to the kitchen, picked up a kitchen knife and, after a further brief warning, stabbed him in
the arm. The gang leader ran off as the patient chased him, and the other gang members
left quickly. On hearing the patient ’s story, the group immediately began to justify this
action as being appropriate and proportionate to the disrespect.
Taking the second clinical example, the clinicians who were leading the group
thought that this incident needed careful exploration due to the apparent risk, but when
they tried to do this the other participants quickly pointed out that the stabbing had beenAntisocial Personality Disorder 191
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
an appropriate reaction to the circumstances. They referred to the fact that the patient
had given warnings: “That is fair. You give a warning and if they don ’t take any notice
they have it coming to them, ”“See, he gave three warnings. That is more than enough.
Only one should be necessary .”They pointed out that “You can ’t allow younger people to
take advantage of your generosity, ”“They start getting the wrong idea about you and think
you are soft, ”and “People like that only understand that sort of lesson .”The participants
concluded that this reaction was the only sensible way to manage the situation, and that
the clinicians would understand this if they were living in the same circumstances.
What Can the Clinician Do?
1. Empathize with the patients ’experience —for example, of being ignored,
disrespected, or taken advantage of —while remaining neutral about the points they
are making: “No one likes to be taken advantage of. If you ask someone politely to
do something it is problematic if they challenge that request; no one likes their authority
to be questioned .What was so difficult for you about this time? ”
2. Manage the mentalizing process —once the story has unfolded, rewind and explore
the story with particular emphasis on the patient ’s experience during the event, and
link this to their current experience in the telling of the story. Does the feeling now
have the same urgency and threat? Can they reappraise what was happening? What
have they learned from it? Ask other patients to identify and consider the feelings
of the narrator during the event, and then ask them to describe their experience
of listening to the story. The participants will identify with the narrator, and this
may allow exploration of everyone ’s sensitivity to shame or humiliation or the
experience of being controlled by another, which threatens their
narcissistic grandiosity.
In placing the action in an emotional context, the aim is to move the focus from
behavioral actions, which are so admired by the participants, to an integrated
cognitive/affective mental understanding of what has happened, and to place it in an
interpersonal context —that is, to widen the field of scrutiny. For example, the
discussion about the stabbing should not only be about the potential humiliation but
also be about the challenge to authority. The focus moves from stabbing as an
appropriate response in the circumstances: “You know, sometimes when people don ’t
do as we ask we feel challenged by it and need to make sure we don ’t lose our position in
the eyes of others. If you look back now, was anything like that going on for you? ”
3. Question their insistence that the eventual action was the only appropriate response.
People with ASPD believe that others will only “get the message ”when it is delivered
in teleological mode, and they themselves only understand others ’mental states
according to their action: “The reason the housing manager did not pass the
application to the medical officer was because she wanted to prevent me being
rehoused ”or“Stabbing him was the correct and reasonable response because it
worked —the other person left the flat as I had told him to. ”The clinician needs to
challenge the group to consider non-teleological solutions to the problem —for
example, “Write to the housing manager, copied to the medical officer, with the expert
by experience ’s help, ”“Mention that the patient could call the gang leader ’s big brother
(or someone whom he respects and is concerned about) who is the patient ’s friend and
ask this person to ‘talk to him ’over the phone and let him know that he has to leave,
otherwise he will get into trouble .”192 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
In summary:
1. Listen to the story and allow other patients to identify with it.
2. Rewind and attempt to re-explore the narrative from the perspective of the emotional
states of the narrator.
3. Encourage other participants to identify the complexity of the emotions of
the narrator.
4. Generalize the experience when possible to focus on underlying or subdominant
components, which commonly include potential humiliation and relational threat.
5. Identify ways to manage the underlying threat to self-esteem differently.
Defiance
People with ASPD are “rebels ”when faced with rules, and oppositional to perceived or
actual authority. This may have much merit, of course, and can be understandable in the
context of their life experience, but there is a tendency for them to see clinicians as being
in authority and a part of the “establishment, ”and therefore makers of rules. These
beliefs and assumptions will interfere with patients ’engagement and treatment, just as
their high levels of epistemic mistrust infuse all of their relationships with suspicion. The
dynamic between patients and the clinician is immediately competitive, and it is all too
easy for a contrary attitude to be activated in the clinician. When this happens, the
patient digs in.
For example, during the assessment the clinician may ask the individual to consider
reducing their acts of aggression. However, the patient may not have this aim. The more
the clinician tries to enforce the aim and insist on it as an area for change, the more
defiant the person with ASPD is likely to become, arguing, for instance, that it is the
world that needs to change rather than them. The patient may be fearful of change for
many reasons, not least of which is that their relationship with the world is organized
around maintaining a sense of personal safety and inviolability. Change is experienced as
submission, loss of face, and an experience of shame; the clinician will evoke such
feelings by challenging the patient directly. Therefore clinicians should avoid any insist-
ence on their own perspective initially, and determinedly use a not-knowing stance to
elaborate the patient ’s experience.
What Can the Clinician Do?
1. Ensure that an oppositional dynamic is not triggered. This is achieved by using the
MBT Loop (see Chapter 4 ), with the clinician maintaining their mentalizing and
inhibiting their counter-responsiveness.
2. Present their own view for the participant to consider once the participant ’s
perspective has been identified, explored, and validated in part.
Clinical Example: Addressing Defiance
A patient was complaining about being forced by the job center to seek work.
PATIENT :I am being hounded by the job center to go to work. They phone me all the time and insist
I attend the job center on a daily basis. I am not going back to work. It is harassment.
Without commenting on the perceived harassment by the job center, the clinician sensi-
tively moved the conversation on to how the patient appraised his own ability to work.Antisocial Personality Disorder 193
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
CLINICIAN :What do you think about going back to work?
PATIENT :I want to, and I don ’t like the idea that I cannot earn money for myself. But I am not
ready yet.
CLINICIAN :In what way?
PATIENT :Just not ready.
CLINICIAN :(in the context of their mutual understanding of the patient ’s anxiety ) That sounds to me like
your anxiety speaking.
PATIENT :Well, I haven ’t worked for a long time, so it ’s not surprising.
CLINICIAN :Sounds like they don ’t see that. How do they see you, do you think?
PATIENT :As a sponger, but I ’m not.
CLINICIAN :So you are living with a feeling of not meeting your own standards at the moment and
you are naturally concerned about a new pattern in your life. But it is terrible to be seen as a
sponger by others when this is really not what is happening.
PATIENT :What do you think?
CLINICIAN :I apologize if it sounds like I am suggesting you do go back to work, but I am thinking
about another aspect of all this along with working with your anxiety. I thought that working
might be one way of improving your sense of personal achievement and making you feel better
about yourself. Is it worth us working on how you might begin to feel you are achieving
something?
3. Validate the patient ’s perspective, but with a twist. In MBT terms, this is a subtle
challenge (see Chapter 4 ) that does not go as far as being oppositional. The aim is to
give a slightly different vantage point on the same situation, looking at it from a
perspective that the patient has not considered: “Working is a pain most of the time.
I agree. But it is often how we use our talents and feel good about ourselves and gain
confidence. Do you feel good about yourself generally at the moment? ”
4. Use an affect focus (see Chapter 4 ) about the interaction that the patient has engaged
in, taking some responsibility for it: “We seem to be getting into something here, where
the more I ask about working and what might be stopping you, the more you oppose it.
Do you have a sense of that? Maybe I am taking a position here that I should not be
taking. It might be better for us to consider if this sort of interaction is something that
repeats itself. ”
Escalating Threats: Patient to Patient
Participants may threaten each other in the group or even outside the group on
WhatsApp, Facebook, or other social media sites. Of course this is unacceptable.
Verbal threats and physical violence are proscribed for all participants in the agreement
made at the beginning of the group. Nevertheless, aggression between group members,
or between them and the clinicians (discussed later), may occur. Aggression between the
group members is often related to misinterpretation of what someone says or automatic194 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
assumptions about the other person based on their facial expression or tone of voice.
Threats between patients stimulate anxiety and fear in the clinician, and undermine their
mentalizing. In this situation the key task is for the clinician to retain their mentalizing
and intervene rapidly.
As soon as the clinician senses rising tension between patients it is important to
intervene. De-escalating impending aggression early on is the key to successful reso-
lution. Initially the aggression is usually verbal but, as the participants often point out,
the time lapse between verbal and physical aggression can be very small.
What Can the Clinician Do?
1. Use any de-escalating technique that you think might be useful! Keep calm verbally
and physically, and maintain a relatively neutral facial expression with natural eye
contact. Do not stare at the patient, lean forward, or clench your fists. Maintain a
physical distance if the patient is not seated, and do not touch them.
Clinical Example: Response to Physical Contact
A member of staff came out of a room to ask two patients who were talking loudly in the
corridor to keep quiet. In doing so, he unthinkingly touched one of them on the shoulder.
The patient stopped and turned on the member of staff: “What did you touch me for? Don ’t
you dare touch me. Who the f*** do you think you are? ”
Physical contact with a patient in low-mentalizing mode is likely to be
experienced as an intrusion and dangerous to the continuity of bodily and mental
self, and consequently perceived as an attack that has to be responded to.
Keep talking and suggest that the group returns to an earlier subject when
mentalizing was present. If necessary, engage in a “broken-record ”repetition of what
you would like to do —rewind and re-consider.
2. The MBT clinician has to maintain a balance between taking authority to manage the
group and their role in stimulating an interactive mentalizing process. Escalating
threats between participants suggest that mentalizing has collapsed. This is the point
at which the clinician should take authority (as distinct from becoming authoritarian,
which would be an escalating approach).
Clinical Example: Roger and Steve
ROGER:Come over here and say that.
STEVE:You don ’t want me to come over there to say it. You really don ’t. You are a piss artist.
CLINICIAN :Thank you. We are not here to call each other names. Steve, thanks for the apology, and
Roger, thanks for accepting the apology. Let ’s now go back to where we were when we were
talking about how we work out if someone is trustworthy.
STEVE:I haven ’t given an apology.
CLINICIAN :No, I gave it for you, and thanks for that. Going back, as I said ...
Here the clinician is trying to manage the situation by reducing the aggression
quickly, keeping some control over the interaction. It may be possible to revisit theAntisocial Personality Disorder 195
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
problem between the two participants later. People with ASPD can tend to bear
grudges and are unlikely to forgive in a meaningful way. Occasionally, the clinician
will be told that they have sorted it out between themselves. This is an indicator to ask
how this was done and if they could talk about it as an illustration of how to work out
conflict without aggression.
3. If Steve leaves the group in the context of this altercation with Roger, one of the
clinicians (if two clinicians are running the group) may go out to talk to him while
the remaining clinician works to calm down the atmosphere in the group and talks to
Roger. It is not necessarily optimal to persuade Steve to return to the group. It may be
better that he goes home now and returns next week. But if Steve calms down, the
clinician can go back into the group to find out if it is safe for him to return. He can
then report back to Steve and negotiate a quick safety agreement between all of the
participants and between Steve and Roger.
Clinical Example: Roger and Steve (continued)
CLINICIAN 1(to Steve ): OK. I will go back in to see if things are safe for everyone and check out if
Roger is calmer too.
CLINICIAN 1(on coming back into the group ): I have been talking to Steve and he is OK now. If things
are calmer here, shall I ask him to come back in and then we can go back to thinking about what
has been happening? But I need to know it is safe and that we are not going to start an argument
again. Roger, what do you think?
ROGER:I don ’t care.
CLINICIAN 2:Roger, do you think you can now manage not to get into an argument with Steve and
we can think more about what was going on?
The two clinicians then take a decision. The principle to follow is for each
clinician to support a different protagonist in the interaction (an approach known as
siding; see Chapter 5 ), and it is for the clinicians to take authority over the decision
on reconvening the group.
4. It may become necessary to ask both patients to leave a group. In this case, do not ask
them to leave at the same time. Suggest that it would be better if they both left. One
clinician then takes out one of the patients and has a brief conversation with them to
try to maintain an alliance and to de-escalate the situation. The remaining clinician in
the group does the same with the other person, and then asks them to leave after a
suitable interval.
Escalating Threats: Patient to Clinician
To some extent threats to the safety of the clinician are more significant to the immediate
continuation of the group. Clinicians will not be able to maintain their own mentalizing
in the context of persistent threats toward them or even toward their families.
Maintaining mentalizing in the clinician is a top priority for an MBT group. Therefore
the principle is for the clinician to maintain or reinstate their own mentalizing in the
context of a personal threat.196 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
What Can the Clinician Do?
Above all, the clinician needs to ensure their own personal safety. If it is not clear that
they are safe they should stop the group session and seek support from other staff.
Assuming that their personal safety is not under threat, the clinician has a number of
options.
1. De-escalate the situation as described in the section on patient-to-patient threats.
2. Apologize for their difficulty in thinking when under threat. The clinician needs to
find a way to say this without becoming submissive —for example, “It is really difficult
for me to think about how to help when I feel under threat ”or“It will make it hard for
me to continue to try to help if I cannot feel safe in developing our work together about
your problems .”
3. If the threat is not severe but is related more to a hierarchical relationship between
patient and clinician, this needs to be identified as an affect focus that is interfering
with treatment.
Idealization of the Patients Themselves as a Group
Patients with ASPD rapidly identify with each other early in treatment, seeing their own
personal qualities and problems as shared between them. This may be the first time that
many of them have sat down with others who share similar problems, and they find it
reassuring to be able to identify with other individuals. This is all to the good. But it soon
becomes group pretend mode with groupthink.
Rapidly, perhaps too rapidly, the patients begin to think that they understand each
other well. When the clinicians start to question a patient, other patients answer for that
person and suggest that the clinicians do not understand the patient in the way that the
group members understand each other. The clinicians are excluded from the patients ’
idealization of themselves as a group. The patients may even arrange something outside
the group, framed as mutual support. If the clinicians try to challenge this, they are seen
as interfering and as failing to understand how the group members can give each other
mutual support: “No one else helps us so we have to help each other .”This is a time when
giving practical advice to each other becomes the norm. However, teleology does not
help to recover mentalizing.
What Can the Clinician Do?
1. Initially, it may be best to accept the cohesion and unity that idealization of
themselves as a group brings. Let the pretend mode run for a time at the beginning of
the group.
2. Validate the patients ’experience of sharing their problems, the sense of belonging
that this experience brings, and how valuable this is, especially when one does not
have the experience of mutuality very often.
3. Move from validation to suggest that this unity is excellent because it gives the
background that they all need to explore differences in perspectives, which is
really helpful.
4. Consider challenging the whole group process (for a discussion of challenge, see
Chapter 4 ). This will entail counterintuitive comments, clarification of the circularity
and superficiality of the discussion, and mischief making —perhaps with someAntisocial Personality Disorder 197
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
cynicism, as, for example, in the context of a discussion about how all of the people
they meet in organizations are unhelpful and “stupid: ”“It is amazing how all of us
come across so many useless and hopeless people in our daily lives. We seem to all
attract them somehow .”
5. Work on the general advice that group members often give to each other in this
context to make it more personal —for example, “I have had that problem. You should
do ....”Here the clinician must attempt to extract a mentalizing process from the
advice: “What is it about Mark that makes you think that your solution might fit him? ”
Explore aspects of the solution that helped the individual, and what it is about their
suggestion that makes them think it is useful for the other person. Ask the other
person to consider it in detail.
Emotional Expression: Self
Earlier in this chapter we suggested that people with ASPD have problems expressing
affective components of their own internal states, particularly within interpersonal
contexts. Identifying their feelings —especially those associated with vulnerability, such
as shame and humiliation —and expressing them within the current interpersonal con-
text is not something that patients will do naturally in the group. However, there is one
exception to this —group members will express forcibly how tense they are or how “close
to the edge ”and explosive they feel. They will also express anger and issue threats. This is
less often related to the interpersonal context in the group, and more likely to be an
expression of their baseline state or a feeling about the organizations they discuss
together, such as the police, the housing department, or the benefits office.
The aim in the group is to encourage patients to identify their current feeling in the
group rather than to express their bitterness about external organizations, and to
increase their recognition of the way that context influences this. So, for example, an
experience of the clinicians listening to them and taking their problems seriously can be
calming, whereas a sense of being ignored can be arousing.
People with ASPD may also have a limited recognition of the complexity of feelings,
with basic emotions being colored by social emotions. This is covered in the MBT-I
sessions, and it may be necessary to remind patients about this. Aggression as part of
survival may be covering fear of humiliation, for example, or related to a fear of losing
agency or that someone else is trying to control them.
Finally, expression of emotion by one participant allows the exploration of early
recognition of that state by others in the group. The clinician combines emotional
expression by an individual with a discussion of the recognition of this state by others.
What Can the Clinician Do?
1. Ensure that the participants are reminded of the information about emotions that
was given in the MBT-I sessions.
2. Specifically work on identifying affects in the group: “How do you feel now? ”If the
patient is unable to label the emotion, ask them to describe their state as best they can,
from their bodily feeling to their general level of tension.
3. Explore possible reasons for the feeling if it is identified: “What makes you feel like
that? Is this related to a particular interpersonal context? ”
5. Move on to ask other patients to describe what feeling the first patient is having and
how they reach that conclusion. What evidence do they use? Is it based on their198 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
sensitivity to the person ’s bodily and emotional expression, or is it more to do with
identifying with the content of the discussion and related to how they themselves
would feel in similar circumstances?
6. Finally, close the circle by asking the patients what feelings they have after having
listened to the first patient, and what it brings up in their minds about themselves.
Emotional Expression: Recognition in Others
The inner emotional state of a person may or may not be recognized by other members
of the group, but it is useful to remember that people with ASPD may be cognitively
aware of the states of others but they do not empathize with the effect that feeling state
has on the other person. At times they misuse their understanding of someone else ’s
underlying state.
Clinical Example: Misuse of Understanding of Another Person ’s Emotional State
A patient described how difficult it was for him to identify how he felt. The clinician
realized that asking the patient to say how he was feeling made this person feel exposed
and embarrassed in front of the other members of the group. So the clinician, empathizing
with the patient being in the spotlight and how difficult that was for him, sensitively
changed the subject. Almost immediately, one of the other patients said “Don ’t change the
topic so quickly. I think Gary needs to say how he feels. How do you feel? Come on, tell us .”It
became apparent that this person wanted the embarrassed patient to feel more and more
uncomfortable, while he himself felt increasingly dominant and in control.
In this situation, the clinician tries to rebalance the mentalizing process by asking the
individual who is tormenting the other person to start describing his own inner state.
This is another example of “siding. ”The clinician becomes psychologically protective of
the vulnerable person by moving the focus away from them, in this case toward the
“attacker, ”who is made more uncomfortable by being asked what hiscurrent feeling is.
What Can the Clinician Do?
1. Work with the group members to see whether they identified how another
participant was or is feeling. If not, why not? Is it because the feeling was or is not
being expressed, or is it because they were not alert to the person ’s feeling? For
example, they may not have noticed that one of the group members was distressed,
yet the clinicians were aware of this due to the patient ’s demeanor and facial
expression.
2. Explore the external mentalizing focus and how it increases understanding of how
someone else feels but at the same time can create confusion unless we test out
our assumptions.
3. Work with a specific example in the group of how a patient feels and whether it was
apparent to the rest of the group.
Moving from an External Mentalizing Focus to an Internal Focus On Other Minds
Relying on external cues —such as facial expression, eye movements, and body posture —
to indicate the motives of others is a normal process and it underpins many daily
interactions. People with ASPD are usually quite sensitive to external cues, particularlyAntisocial Personality Disorder 199
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
if these are related to the way someone looks at them; “the look ”is a universal trigger for
aggression and violence, and yet they can rarely explain what it actually looks like to
them. Reasoning with such ill-defined cues presents a problem: “What is ‘the look ’? What
does ‘the look ’mean about what someone thinks and feels? ”Expressions are well recog-
nized when they occur, but cannot be meaningfully described. Sensitivity to external cues
does not translate into interest in the internal emotional states of the other or into
curiosity about the other ’s underlying motives. People with ASPD often assume that
others ’motives are malign unless proven otherwise, and react accordingly to counter the
threat, regardless of the expressions of affect that they encounter. The clinician needs to
help these patients to pause, stop this automatic type of thinking, and take a genuine
interest in other people ’s internal states after having identified an external cue.
What Can the Clinician Do?
1. In group work, ask the patients to practice questioning someone in the group about
their internal states: “Tell me what makes you shout like that. ”Insist that the patients
listen to that person ’s answers.
2. Take an interaction in the group and focus on elements of the interpersonal
understanding.
Clinical Example: Understanding Other People ’s Internal States
One patient was saying how angry he was about a child protection social worker, raising
his voice as he told the story of her alleged incompetence. When he paused in his diatribe,
the clinician asked him to stop so that the group could explore their understanding of his
current feelings and the basis for their understanding. The group said that he was
obviously angry, because he was shouting. The clinician said that he could see that, but
he thought that this person also felt aggrieved that he was being misunderstood by the
social worker, and that in addition he now felt powerless to change anything. The clinician
then asked the patient to appraise the accuracy of this understanding of his feelings.
3. Generate a process that supports the participants in appraising feeling states and
recognizing underlying motives as more complex than the binary “for me or against
me”understanding to which people with ASPD so often subscribe.
Paranoid Reactions
Paranoid reactions might occur in the group. These may result in escalating threats
(described earlier), which are themselves often triggered by misunderstandings, sensitivity,
and frank paranoid interpretations of something that is said, or by inappropriate reliance
on an external mentalizing focus and associated assumptions about others ’motives.
Occasionally, a patient may react explosively to something that the clinician or one of
the other participants says, and in this case the interventions suggested for de-escalating
threats are recommended. However, the reaction may be primarily mental rather than
physical, with the patient responding verbally, albeit expressing considerable anxiety.
Clinical Example: Paranoid Reactions
In a discussion about feelings, the clinician suggested that it might be useful for the group
to consider how they begin to recognize that they are becoming angry.200 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
JAMES (reacting suddenly ): You are trying to control us. You are trying to take us over. I am not doing
this. You only want to find out how our minds work so that you can take over.
CLINICIAN :I am so sorry, James. Can you tell me what I was saying or doing that makes you
think that?
JAMES:You just ask us to tell you what happens in our minds so that you can control what we think.
CLINICIAN :Please can you describe how I do that? I don ’t want to do that at all. So I need to be sure
that I don ’t keep making you feel that, as I can see that any of us would feel uncomfortable in
circumstances like that and not want to let anyone know how we feel.
JAMES:Why would you want to know what makes me angry? It is just so that you can deliberately
make me angry whenever you want to.
What Can the Clinician Do?
1. Try to understand the patient ’s perspective. Suggest that the motive was not to
control the patient, as the clinician has explained in the previous clinical example, but
that you would like to try to see what it was that made the patient see it like that:
“Help me see how you took that from what I said. Do you know other people who try to
do that? Can you remember when someone else tried to get control over you? ”
2. Explore patient-to-patient motives and reactions. Do they all have the same
experience of the clinician ’s motivation? “Is this something that others can relate to? ”
3. Try to find something that you can validate within the reaction. James had had some
difficult experiences with his father, who asked him questions merely in order to find
an opportunity to punish him: “Does it make sense to others as well that if you have a
father like James remembers his father, you end up being suspicious when anyone tries
to ask you questions about yourself? ”
4. In opening up the discussion to the group and asking the participants if they had a
similar understanding of the other ’s/clinician ’s motive (which is part of the MBT
Loop; see Chapter 4 ), the clinician moves toward the likely driver of the paranoid
reaction —the fear of helplessness and shame. Beware of humiliating the patient while
doing this. Being reminded of one ’s powerlessness is certainly humiliating. The
middle of a paranoid attack may not be the best time to try to explore underlying
shame if it is part of the driver of the reaction. This exploration can be done only
when the patients are calmer and more reflective, and can look back at themselves.
Nevertheless, by picturing it in their own mind, the clinician can empathize with the
fact that they would feel extremely vulnerable when answering questions about
activities in the knowledge that this could lead to unpredictable punishment. The
clinician can even express admiration of how well and courageously James had coped
with a brutalizing parent.
Concluding Remarks
MBT is modified for the treatment of people with ASPD, but the core processes and
interventions of the model are retained. The effectiveness of the approach is currently
under investigation in a randomized controlled trial, following the principle that allAntisocial Personality Disorder 201
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
mentalization-based treatment approaches should be subjected to rigorous assessment
[11,12]. The current indications are that treatment has beneficial effects, and that MBT-
ASPD-G can be implemented successfully within a mental health service. Integration
with the criminal justice system is necessary in order to disrupt a default of antisocial
behavior being criminalized and leading to punishment, which serves only to further
embed the individual ’s experience of alienation and social isolation, and prevents a
personal attitudinal change through learning prosocial behavior from the social world.
References
1. Sharp C, Wright AG, Fowler JC et al. The
structure of personality pathology: both
general ( ‘g’) and specific ( ‘s’) factors?
J Abnorm Psychol 2015; 124: 387 –98.
2. Wright AG, Hopwood CJ, Skodol AE,
Morey LC. Longitudinal validation of
general and specific structural features of
personality pathology. J Abnorm Psychol
2016; 125: 1120 –34.
3. Bateman A, Bolton R, Fonagy P.
Antisocial personality disorder: a
mentalizing framework. Focus 2013; 11:
178–86.
4. Bateman A, Fonagy P. Comorbid
antisocial and borderline personality
disorders: mentalization-based treatment.
J Clin Psychol 2008; 64: 181 –94.
5. Gilligan J. Violence: Reflections on Our
Deadliest Epidemic . London, UK: Jessica
Kingsley Publishers, 2000.
6. Kim J, Cicchetti D. Longitudinal
pathways linking child maltreatment,
emotion regulation, peer relations, and
psychopathology. J Child Psychol
Psychiatry 2010; 51: 706 –16.
7. Sharp C, Vanwoerden S, Van Baardewijk
Y et al. Callous-unemotional traits are
associated with deficits in recognizing
complex emotions in preadolescent
children. J Personal Disord 2015; 29:
347–59.8. Bateman A, Fonagy P. Mentalization-
Based Treatment for Personality
Disorders: A Practical Guide . Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2016.
9. Bateman A, Motz A, Yakeley J. Antisocial
personality disorder in community and
prison settings. In: Bateman A, Fonagy P,
eds. Handbook of Mentalizing in Mental
Health Practice , 2nd ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association
Publishing, 2019; 335 –49.
10. Coccaro EF. The Overt Aggression Scale
Modified (OAS-M) for clinical trials
targeting impulsive aggression and
intermittent explosive disorder: validity,
reliability, and correlates. J Psychiatr Res
2020; 124:5 0–57.
11. Fonagy P, Yakeley J, Gardner T et al.
Mentalization for Offending Adult Males
(MOAM): study protocol for a
randomized controlled trial to evaluate
mentalization-based treatment for
antisocial personality disorder in male
offenders on community probation.
Trials 2020; 21: 1001.
12. Bateman A, O ’Connell J, Lorenzini N
et al. A randomised controlled trial of
mentalization-based treatment versus
structured clinical management for
patients with comorbid borderline
personality disorder and antisocial
personality disorder. BMC Psychiatry
2016; 16: 304.202 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4008 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part III
Chapter
8Application and Adaptations for Mental Health
Presentations
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Introduction
Avoidant personality disorder (AvPD) presents a special challenge to most clinicians.
This is not simply because there is a paucity of research concerning this group, in stark
contrast to the considerable body of research on borderline personality disorder (BPD) —
nor is it due to the lack of a compelling theoretical framework that would support the
formulation of an individual presenting with AvPD, or to the lack of structured
evidence-based interventions for individuals who are obviously experiencing very sub-
stantial distress. The reason for the challenge is that the subjective experiences of people
with AvPD are hard to articulate collaboratively, which often leaves the clinician in the
dark about such basic questions as what “avoidance ”or even “improvement ”means for
the patient. The usual clinical strategies of mentalization-based treatment (MBT) also fall
short in the face of rudimentary descriptions of inner experiences and meager
sense making.
The Diagnosis of AvPD
The dimensional classification of severity of self- and other personality functioning and
the specification of personality trait domains as described in the alternative model in
Section III of DSM-5 [ 1] and in ICD-11 [ 2] are far better suited to the MBT approach in
general. This is without doubt the case for AvPD in clinical practice. However, the
description of AvPD in DSM-IV as “a pervasive pattern of social inhibition, feelings of
inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation ”(American Psychiatric
Association [ 3], p. 672) remains helpful in providing a clinical description, even if it is
simplified for the sake of efficient communication. This and some other clinical descrip-
tions in the literature [ 4–7] are summarized in Box 8.1 .
Box 8.1 Descriptive characteristics of AvPD with some features that may differentiate
it from other personality disorders.
/C15Pervasive pattern of social inhibition.
/C15Feelings of inadequacy.
/C15Hypersensitivity to negative evaluation.
/C15Reduced ability to experience pleasure.
/C15Hypersensitivity to psychic pain.
/C15Shyness and reticence, leading to a life with few rewards and much suffering.
/C15Reluctance to initiate social relationships (individuals with schizoid personality disorder
do not want social relationships).
203
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
These descriptors highlight the phobic nature of AvPD and point to potential
overlaps with social anxiety disorder (SAD), which is also characterized by fears of
becoming embarrassed or of feeling inadequate as well as minimizing aspects related
to low self-esteem and hypersensitivity to rejection. Some authors believe that there are
qualitative differences between SAD and AvPD. From an interpersonal perspective, SAD,
social phobia, and AvPD are defined by a marked tendency toward social avoidance and
non-assertiveness [ 8]. Qualitative differences, if any, are likely to be subtle and relate to
how the person manages this interpersonal challenge psychologically and physically [ 9].
The more intense concern about self-esteem, identity, and relational functioning, as well
as reduced ability to experience enjoyment, may differentiate AvPD from SAD [ 10].
MBT largely sidesteps these diagnostic issues by seeking a single final common
developmental pathway of vulnerability for a range of severe disorders that may never-
theless be addressed using a family of interventions based on a core model that requires
technical modification to meet the needs of different clinical presentations. Thus the
challenge for MBT formulations related to a specific diagnosis such as AvPD is twofold:
1. to identify a general failure in the domain of mentalizing that links the presentation
to the “family ”of difficulties that can be appropriately managed by MBT techniques
2. to define the presence of a specific configuration or pattern of mentalizing anomalies
that directly link to the described phenomenology and current evidence base for
AvPD, to allow individual formulations with sufficient detail to focus and guide the
way in which treatment is undertaken.
Establishing the Key Concerns of Patients with AvPD
The characteristic difficulty associated with AvPD is an expectation that others will not
be available, and therefore it makes sense to suppress emotions and individual needs in
order to avoid negative outcomes, including the disapproval of others [ 11]. The intense
concerns of people with AvPD are about self-esteem, identity, and relational functioning,
and these individuals also find it difficult to experience enjoyment.
The Experience of AvPD
The complexity of the experience of AvPD mirrors some of the so-called “push-me-pull-
you”dynamics of BPD, with intensely ambivalent attachment organization —on the one
hand fearing and on the other hand longing for connection, while at the same time also
intensely desiring solitude. It is confusing for both the patient and the clinician that
someone can wish to fit in and be part of a community, and to establish meaningfulBox 8.1 (cont. )
/C15Intense feelings of internalized shame and a desire to actively avoid relationships
despite feeling a need to belong.
/C15Fear of rejection or humiliation, which may result in the person appearing unassertive
(individuals with dependent personality disorder may be more fearful of
abandonment, show an inability to cope in isolation, and initiate and cling to
relationships in which they feel accepted).204 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
connections to people around them, while at the same time expressing a powerful need
for the freedom and restoration that being alone and even isolated provides for them.
Most threatening of all are the feelings and judgments of others, their reasons and
drivers, and their possible objectives and aspirations. Proximity to others, although
desirable, quickly becomes unhelpful, as people with AvPD feel increasingly vulnerable
when intimacy increases —the possibility of getting closer increases the risk of being
“found out ”or“exposed ”in some way.
Isolation is not a good solution for most individuals with a diagnosis of AvPD. Being
by themselves leaves them alone with their painful subjective experiences and intense
negative feelings about themselves, with a real danger of being crushed and drowned by
untethered ideas and emotions spinning around in their mind. Some of these ideas are
excruciating doubts about themselves, and deep uncertainties concerning their own
accomplishments, attitudes, plans, perceptions, beliefs, feelings, wishes, intentions, and
opinions —in fact any aspect that could be ascribed to the self.
As with individuals with narcissistic personality disorder (NPD) (see Chapter 6 )a n d
antisocial personality disorder (see Chapter 7 ), avoiding “loss of face ”—that is, humiliation —
is critically important for people with a diagnosis of AvPD. Patients may be reluctant to reveal
the full extent of the distress that they experience because they benefit more than most from
preserving an outward semblance of normality and appearing in the same way that others
appear to them —calm, secure, competent, assured, and on. For these individuals, it is
particularly important not to attract attention, stand out, or be noticed, because this enables
them to avoid the crushing judgments that they can experience from any kind of reaction
from others. Social withdrawal occurs when the strategy of “merging into the crowd ”fails—in
brief, avoidance is not related to wanting to avoid contact with others, but rather to wanting to
avoid what can be felt as the inevitable reaction of others.
Because the level of distress engendered by these thoughts and ideas is substantial
(comparable to that experienced by individuals with BPD), patients with AvPD are often
quite self-absorbed, both studiously dissecting and trying to completely ignore their
experiences. However, inadequate social exposure means that their capacity to make
informed normative judgments about individual behaviors and cooperative social behav-
iors is quite limited. This leads to a sense of uncertainty about their place in the everyday
world, and contributes to a sense of ontological insecurity. They present as somewhat
alienated from their own experience, and give an impression that they understand little
about their wishes, their agency, and, more generally, their subjectivity. For the clinician,
this can make attempts to obtain information about the internal experiences of patients
with AvPD deeply frustrating.
Often the best route into subjectivity may be via the physical world that surrounds
the patient, as it provides a welcome refuge from painful and unproductive self-scrutiny.
Enquiring into activities that give relief (e.g., nature walks, pets, art, music) may be a way
of exploring interpersonal relationships when direct questioning might yield too little
valuable information.
Clinical Example: Jane
In a matter-of-fact way, Jane, who is 24 years old, described her current feelings of being
alone in the world and never really being with people even when they were there. She hadAvoidant Personality Disorder 205
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
always felt different from others, and could remember this experience from childhood. Even
in primary school she often found herself looking at others playing and thinking that they
seemed to have learned something that she had not. She felt different and tried to stay in
the background as much as possible. She found the transition to secondary school difficult,
and she remembered being confused and stressed by the change, as she had to learn new
information and adapt to an unfamiliar environment. She was seen as different by others,
but she managed to avoid being bullied as she was able to join in with a small group
of peers. She was intelligent and managed her higher exams, but decided not to go to
university and instead to stay at home with her parents. She got a job in the tax office,
monitoring the information on tax returns and looking for anomalies which suggested that
investigation into the tax return was needed. Her social life was limited to a few contacts
from school. However, even now she still reported feeling isolated when she was with them,
and feeling different and alone. She presented a rather forlorn figure and spent considerable
time on her own. In the family home her experience had always been that her parents lived
quietly themselves and generally disregarded her attempts to talk about herself, just as they
had always done in her view: “There was no one there to take care of me, to talk to, to ask
about things or to help me begin to understand things I didn ’tu n d e r s t a n d .”
She wanted to know if there was something wrong with her or whether she was
autistic. Careful assessment showed that this was not the case and that her problems were
characterized more by fear of rejection and feelings of personal inadequacy and difference
from others. This led to her extensive avoidance of social interaction, and particularly
of friendship and closeness. It was this that she was concerned about. She wanted to
have relationships.
The Experience of the Assessment
It is quite easy for the assessment interview with a patient who has a likely diagnosis of
AvPD to turn into a relatively meaningless question-and-answer session. The questions are
searching but the answers are shallow and feel superficial, lacking the rich and vivid
descriptions of the patient ’s life that the clinician expects. Frequently the patient responds
with “Id o n ’tk n o w ”or confirms the clinician ’s suggestion but gives the clinician the
impression that they could equally well have confirmed the opposite of what was being
suggested. The average clinician ’s training equips them to allow richly verbalized accounts
to be articulated without hindrance, just giving gentle direction to keep the focus on the
phenomenon in question. However, interviews with individuals with AvPD will not meet
expectations that a detailed, in-depth account of phenomena will be obtained. In the face of
the limitations of the information obtained the clinician is likely to feel inadequate,
somewhat impatient, or even irritated, perhaps covering for a sense of shame they may
feel in relation to the sparseness of the account they have been able to elicit. This is both
inappropriate and deeply unhelpful. The sparseness is the message. What the clinical
assessment reveals is the patient ’s experience conveyed according to their best ability,
and within this general presentation two distinct forms of mentalizing are frequently
discernible —a hypomentalizing form and a hypermentalizing form.
Hypomentalizing Form
In the hypomentalizing form, the message is the absence of content and is to be found in
the blandness of what is actually being conveyed. The patient truly does not know what206 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
to tell the clinician. Here the issue to be explored is what it is like for the patient to be
asked questions and not to know the answers —not knowing what to say or not under-
standing what others want from them, not understanding what the other person has said,
and so on :“What is it like to see me and be asked all these questions? What effect does it
have on you that I ask things that you don ’t know how to answer? ”The not-knowing
stance used in MBT to elicit the patient ’s internal experience is essential, but at the same
time the clinician is almost forced to start filling in the patient ’s internal world with what
they expect to find, as they find so little. Such impatience, whether implicit or explicit,
feeds into the hypersensitivity to criticism with which these individuals come to the
consultation, and it can (and frequently does) lead to the breakdown of the potential for a
therapeutic dialogue.
Hypermentalizing Form
With other patients, the same configuration of overall problems can manifest in a
different manner, characterized by hypermentalizing. The patient, well practiced in the
long silences and painful communication failures which are a feature of question-and-
answer sessions when these involve attempts to get them to elaborate their personal
experience, offers an obliging and friendly narrative discourse in which they address very
serious topics in the most superficial ways. MBT refers to this as an aspect of pretend
mode, where the clinician is invited to engage in what is an imaginary discourse between
an imagined person and their therapist. The patient finds it relatively easy to enter into
this dialogue because it does not feel to them as if it is about them. Patients engage in this
to reduce the embarrassment of the process of conversation, and are probably motivated
by a wish to be liked; they prioritize trying to make the clinician feel comfortable despite
being very uncomfortable themselves and being fully aware of the limitations of the
process in which they are engaging. Challenge, a recommended intervention for fixed
pretend mode in MBT (see Chapter 4 ), is in this context both counterproductive and
unfair. Progress is more likely to be made if the clinician expresses gratitude to the
patient for their efforts to create such a productive atmosphere, and shows empathy for
them undertaking all the work and feeling that they have received little in return. Getting
to the difficulty these patients have in talking about their experiences in the way that they
sometimes hear others being able to do is the important end point of the assessment, and
creates a desirable focus for the intervention.
Clinical Example: Jane (continued)
Jane talked about herself and her family in detail. In particular, she was aware that her
brother was different from her. He had left home and was living with his girlfriend. He had
been the one person she had tried to talk to, but he used to tell her that she was “weird ”
and “should stop worrying. ”This was how she thought other people saw her, and that they
were seeing something that she did not see about herself.
CLINICIAN :You talk about yourself very well. As you tell me this can you say what it makes you feel?
JANE:It is OK.
CLINICIAN :Has it helped at all to tell your story?Avoidant Personality Disorder 207
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
JANE:Yes.
CLINICIAN :In what sort of way?
JANE:It is helpful.
The story that Jane told was processed in hypermentalizing pretend mode. It was
coherent and she had worked out what was happening for herself. But the few questions
asked by the clinician suggest that the story is not tethered to experience and emotion.
There is a disconnect between Jane ’s cognitive and affective processing. Her answers are
brief and will eventually frustrate her and the clinician, pushing both of them toward a
low-mentalizing interaction. The clinician ’s mind will go blank. This is where the
importance of the MBT formulation comes to the fore. It can be used as the reference
point when treatment becomes stuck.
The Experience of the Treatment
When initiating a treatment process, the relational problems identified in the assessment
phase will return to a great extent, and the core processes of MBT have to be considered,
namely:
1. a mentalizing understanding of the limitations of the therapeutic encounter
2. the attachment strategies of the patient
3. the characteristic mentalizing impairments with which they struggle.
Limitations
Just as the assessment might be taxing, the treatment can be equally challenging because,
compared with the average therapy, the psychological content brought by the patient
offers only sparse material to work with. This can affect even an experienced MBT
clinician, challenging their ability to generate mentalizing by the usual strategies of the
not-knowing stance, clarification, elaboration, affect narrative work, and relational
mentalizing. One general aspect that may be helpful at the outset concerns the
clinician ’s counter-response, which was mentioned earlier. Ineffective mentalizing
gives rise to more ineffective mentalizing —it is contagious, and clinicians can “catch ”
it from their patients. There is a readily recognizable phenomenon of secondary avoid-
ance that can occur in the course of treatment of individuals with AvPD. Clinicians who
are unable to penetrate the barriers erected by the patient may be tempted to collude with
the patient, either by implicitly accepting that the barriers are insurmountable, using
various rationales (e.g., the patient is too vulnerable, their social context is genuinely
hostile), or by engaging with the patient ’s pretend-mode thinking and working with
them to elaborate what are fundamentally avoidant strategies. Whereas the impulsivity
of patients with BPD rarely permits such an inappropriate blunting of therapeutic zeal,
the lack of “drama ”in the course of treatment of AvPD patients sometimes allows the
clinician to be inappropriately complacent about the patient ’s underlying pain, and to
forget that underneath the pretend sense of coping there is likely to be distress that is
every bit as profound as it is —albeit in a more obvious way —in more “dramatic ”
patients.208 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Attachment Strategies in AvPD
Attachment anxiety, particularly intense fear of abandonment, is an important characteristic
of patients with AvPD, who show high levels of both attachment anxiety and attachment
avoidance, consistent with a fearful attachment style [ 12,13]. In an avoidant attachment style
the other is characterized negatively, whereas an anxious attachment style is linked to
negative representations of a self in need of support from others; the combination of anxiety
and avoidance offers no solace in either proximity seeking or avoidance. As the previous
chapters have shown, this combination of attachment strategies is by no means unique to
individuals with AvPD, and is shared by those with BPD and NPD, and perhaps all those
with high levels of symptoms of mental disturbance (see Chapter 2 ). However, as Simonsen
and Euler have pointed out, although the configuration of attachment strategies may
overlap, the psychopathology of patients with AvPD necessitates consideration of the
social-status system in which their attachment relationships are embedded [ 14]. Patients
with AvPD may fear separation, but in many cases —and in a similar way to individuals with
NPD —they may also be focused on issues of autonomy and relational power dynamics.
An important aspect of the attachment strategies of patients with AvPD is the immense —
almost life-and-death —power that can be given to the attachment figure whose response to
the patient is experienced as determining their well-being. Within a mentalizing framework,
this would be understood as alien parts of the self (seeChapter 2 )—critical, denigrating,
humiliating parts —which are externalized into the attachment figure, otherwise they would
become a vehicle for aspects of the self-structure that give rise to even more painful and
distressing internal persecution from within. In support of this view, Beeney et al. found that
self/other boundaries (e.g., difficulties with emotion contagion, feeling separate from others)
mediated the relationship between attachment anxiety and AvPD [ 15]. Because of the
externalization of the critical alien part of the self, the possibility of turning to others for
protection and support when in distress may rarely seem to be a viable option. The
interpersonal world becomes filled with hostile and critical voices.
Mentalizing Difficulties in AvPD
The dimensions of mentalizing are used clinica lly to capture the limitations that are typically
encountered in particular clinical groups. Of course, just as there is an overlap in symptoms
between different clinical groups, there is so me overlap in mentalizing difficulties across
diagnoses, particularly because when a patient is stuck at one end of a dimension of mentalizing
this affects mentalizing in other dimensions (f or a discussion of the me ntalizing dimensions,
seeChapter 2 ). However, thinking about a patient ’s dimensional profile does provide a useful
structure for understanding the clinical pict u r ea si te m e r g e si nt h ec o u r s eo fa s s e s s m e n ta n d
treatment. The evidence of mentalizing problems in AvPD is summarized in Box 8.2 .
Box 8.2 Mentalizing problems in AvPD.
Automatic/Controlled
/C15More automatic than controlled.
/C15Low implicit/explicit reflective functioning on childhood attachment narratives.
/C15Automatic filling-in of self-experience based on the assumption that the other ’s
experience is negative.
/C15Hypermentalizing or hypomentalizing, depending on the style of AvPD.Avoidant Personality Disorder 209
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Automatic (Implicit)/Controlled (Reflective, Explicit) Mentalizing
Interestingly, of the relatively small am ount of empirical res e a r c ho nA v P Dt h a th a s
been reported, a significant proportion i s concerned with ways in which mentalizing
is limited in this disorder. A study that operationalized mentalizing as reflective
functioning on narratives of childhood attachment experiences in the Adult
Attachment Interview reported an associat ion between AvPD and difficulties with
reflective functioning, which loaded highly on to the controlled (reflective, explicit)
pole of the automatic/controlled dimension [ 16]. Another study compared the ability
to understand mental states in patients with AvPD and in individuals with social
phobia, and reported that patients with AvPD had the lowest scores [ 17]. Similarly,
individuals with AvPD in particular appeared to experience difficulties in monitoring
mental states [ 18]. These difficulties would be expected to leave them uncertain and
confused in the course of explicit reflection about their own feelings or thoughts about
something. This may be a defensive avoidance of explicit mentalizing because of the
profoundly negative characterization of both self and other in their interpersonal
representational world. Why would anyone wish to spend cognitive effort on thinking
about their sense of shame or worthlessne ss? Of course, if the automatic assumptions
of these self-characterizations are to be addressed, precisely such a focus may be what is
most helpful. Without it, automatic assumpti ons (implicit mentalizing) will ensure the
maintenance of this mode of self-experience. The clinician is required to focus their
effort on activating and reinforcing explicit mentalizing and, if necessary, challenging
this self-perpetuating cycle. They need to approach this process with sufficient
empathy to enable the patient to mentalize di stressing self-representations, and they
should sensitively soften their approach , slow their progress, and become more sup-
p o r t i v ew h e ne x p l i c i tm e n t a lizing becomes too painful.Box 8.2 (cont. )
Cognitive/Affective
/C15More cognitive than affective.
/C15Low reflectivity on emotional states of self.
/C15Reduced mentalized affectivity.
/C15Failure to share emotions with others, and suppression of emotional expression.
External/Internal
/C15Overuse of external cues and reduced ability to identify internal states.
/C15Disconnection between internal bodily sensations and relevant external stimuli.
/C15Misclassification of emotion from facial expression.
Self/Other
/C15Low scores on monitoring the mental states of self and others.
/C15Excess focus on others ’thoughts about self.
/C15Excessively self-focused during social interaction, with limited consideration of the
other ’s state of mind.
/C15Powerful negative characterization of self and other.210 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
As we mentioned earlier in this chapter, people with AvPD are often characterized by
hypermentalizing (e.g., intellectualizing, ruminating), which can be seen as the overuse of
the controlled pole of the automatic/controlled dimension of mentalizing.
Hypermentalizing can occur because the reflective capacity is disconnected from real-
ity—that is, it is in pretend mode. However, low reflective capacity can also manifest as
hypomentalizing (e.g., blanking out). The intuitive knowing of reality embodied in fast
thinking/automatic/implicit mentalizing no longer functions as a brake on ideas, and
imagination becomes untethered from external reality. Individuals with AvPD can thus
end up using thoughts and reflection as a way of distancing themselves from whatever
emotions are evoked by particular situations. Again this is a form of pretend mode. As a
reminder, pretend mode (for a more detailed discussion, see Chapter 2 ) is so named
because it resembles mentalizing but lacks emotional authenticity; it can be excessively
intellectual, analytical, or just improbable [ 19,20]. Because pretend mode is disconnected
from reality, engaging with it clinically (i.e., discussing it with the patient) is unlikely to
be productive. Because it is unconstrained by reality, nothing stops it from being entirely
self-serving, which compromises the chances of generating a constructive shift of
perspective in other mentalizing dimensions (self to other, cognitive to affective).
A particular challenge for the clinician is that the patient, unsurprisingly, experiences
highlighting of the limitations of their contributions as criticism, as they are unaware of
what the clinician regards as the limitations in their mentalizing. This results in a
considerable threat to the therapeutic relationship, which can become mired in repetition
and a lack of progress.
Cognitive/Affective Mentalizing
Patients with AvPD tend to be more cognitive than affective in their mentalizing stance.
The capacity to perceive, reflect on, tolerate, and express emotional experiences appears
limited in AvPD [ 21]. Affect consciousness and conceptual expressivity are lower in
patients with AvPD than in those with BPD [ 22]. Mentalized affectivity may be more or
less absent, generating a notable shift away from balanced cognitive/affective mentalizing
toward the cognitive pole. Anxiety and shame often dominate, but mentalizing strategies
are configured to avoid these emotional experiences —for instance, engaging in hypo-
mentalizing (e.g., not thinking about feelings at all) or hypermentalizing in relation to
them. A functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study that compared AvPD
patients with controls who had not been diagnosed with a mental health problem found
amygdala hyper-reactivity in anticipation of an explicit emotion-regulation task in
patients with AvPD [ 23]. Thus we assume that the sequence may commonly be hyper-
mentalizing triggered by heightened amygdala responses, leading to dysregulation,
followed by avoidance and hypomentalizing.
The cognitive capacity to perceive and make sense of emotions may also be impaired
in people with AvPD, as suggested by studies that examined alexithymia (difficulty in
recognizing one ’s own feelings) in this population [ 24], although more recent studies
have shown this to be a substantial problem in only a proportion (perhaps 50 –60%) of
individuals with AvPD [ 25]. Supporting the key role of problematic mentalizing in these
patients, this latter study of “non-comorbid ”AvPD patients showed that alexithymia
scores were powerful independent predictors of personality dysfunction. People with
AvPD have marked problems in sharing their feelings with others. This creates potentialAvoidant Personality Disorder 211
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
problems not only for clinicians but also for the individual ’s family, who may be unaware
of the pain that the person experiences [ 26]. In mentalizing terms, this may be viewed as
gross communication problems with both the congruency of affective mirroring and the
marking of emotions.
Internal/External Mentalizing
Clinical experience and some systematic studies suggest that patients with AvPD have
difficulty tapping into the harder-to-judge internal sources of information about mental
states, leading them to place undue emphas is on external cues. In an investigation
of specific subcomponents of metacognitive abilities, patients with AvPD were found
to have difficulty monitoring both their own internal states and the internal states
of others ( “decentration, ”described in more detail later; see this chapter: Self/Other
Mentalizing) [ 18]. This finding is all the more interesting because the comparison
groups were individuals with other personal ity disorders, which indicates that there is
a specific difficulty in people with AvPD. The findings of an fMRI study may point
to the cause of this difficulty. When shown pictures with strong negative affective
content, AvPD patients exhibited less insula –ventral anterior cingulate functional
connectivity compared with either BPD patients or non-clinical controls [ 27]. This
points to a potential failure of full understanding of internal states rooted in an
anomaly of interoceptive awareness. Th e process of making connections between
internal bodily sensations and relevant external stimuli may be disrupted in patients
with AvPD. Significantly, a dysfunction of t his kind has also been identified in patients
with SAD [ 28].
One study suggested that there was some impairment of judgment of external
indicators of emotion, where AvPD patients were shown to misclassify full facial
expressions of fear [ 29]. As Simonsen and Euler have pointed out, this may not be a
misreading of emotional expression but rather the manifestation of an attentional
strategy by these individuals to avoid focusing on intense emotion altogether, as a way
of managing their vulnerable affect regulation [ 14].
We know less about emotional expression in AvPD, although it is likely to be
significantly impaired. From clinical experience we know that people with AvPD may
not express their emotions externally, which makes it harder for them to be understood
by others and generates a communication challenge for those close to them, as well as for
the clinician. Appropriate and marked contingent expression of affect is essential for
both empathy and communication, and is likely to be vital for both learning and
affiliation [ 30]. The blunted expression that we see in AvPD may be an important but
little-studied cause of the social isolation of these individuals [ 31] and the epistemic
vigilance that they generate in those close to them.
Self/Other Mentalizing
The challenge for AvPD patients in organizing their mentalizing appears to be related to a
bias toward self-mentalizing and decentration (discussed later in this section). As we have
seen, the configuration of attachment strategies in AvPD is predominantly fearful. Both
self and other are seen in a negative light. Benign representations of others (good internal
objects) are fragile and insufficiently developed, so are not able to provide a background of
safety for exploration. Therefore free and unconstrained delving into the mental states of
others is avoided, resulting in both psychological and behavioral inhibition.212 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The default mentalizing position of people with AvPD is the self rather than the other
[32,33]. The mental state of the other may be the apparent focus for individuals with this
diagnosis, but the other ’s thoughts and feelings about the self are the primary area of
concern. Individuals with AvPD have more severe metacognitive difficulties with both
alexithymia and the capacity for decentration —that is, dealing with the fact that others
have a different perspective from their own [ 18,24]. This understanding of AvPD helps
to elaborate detail about the way the self/other dimension of mentalizing —and MBT —is
organized, distinguishing between self and other functions in social interaction and
psychopathology. Maresh and Andrews-Hanna suggest that three mentalizing foci for
the self require elaboration in the complex process of differentiating self from other: (a)
the self as the target of inferences about mental states; (b) the self-experience as the
source of information about mentalizing inferences; and (c) the image of the self as seen
by the other, which is constructed from interaction with the other [ 34]; in Chapter 6 we
described this as “self-as-object ”mentalizing or the “me-mode. ”
Inferring one ’s own mental states —or, as William James termed it, “introspection ”
[35]—is mentalizing when the self is the target. This is the “I.”Although this seems
straightforward and unambiguous, in normal social interactions we do not know the
extent to which individuals actually consider themselves as targets of mentalizing [ 36].
As we discussed in Chapter 2 , the available sources of information for self-focused
mentalizing are physiological and emotional reactions —internal experiences that are
not normally accessible when the target of mentalizing is the other. In addition, the
pervasiveness of self-perception biases shows that there are substantial limits to self-
knowledge, and that much of the information that should intuitively be available to
reflective, explicit mentalizing actually occurs outside conscious awareness, making it
impossible to use during social interaction. In MBT, the concern with effective mentaliz-
ing leads to a focus on the balance and appropriateness of mentalizing along the self/
other dimension.
Self-focused (self-as-target) mentalizing uses the same, or similar, mechanisms for
inference as other-focused mentalizing. It may, for example, involve one ’s observation of
one’s own behavior as the basis of introspection to make accurate inferences about
mental states [ 34]. We begin to know what we feel and what we think by what we do. We
begin to know someone else by understanding ourselves. There has been suggestion that
specific neural structures operating in self-focused versus other-focused mentalizing may
point to qualitatively distinct processes, but they are substantially the same. Evidence
from neuroscience studies suggests that there is a significant overlap in the activation
patterns of the ventral and dorsal regions of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) of the
brain in both cases. It is likely that this brain structure constitutes the “agent-independ-
ent”location for processing person-relevant information. It is not specific to either the
self or the other, but to both. Evidence for a distinct location in the mPFC for self versus
other mentalizing is more likely to be attributable to differences in the level of abstrac-
tion for which the ventral and dorsal regions of the mPFC are specialized. It seems that
the dorsal mPFC subsystem has a primary role in both self-focused and other-focused
mentalizing when these involve abstract and reflective mental processes [ 37].
In AvPD, mentalizing is excessively self-focused during social interactions. This is at
the expense of processing information from the social environment. Individuals with
AvPD focus excessively on monitoring thoughts, feelings, and internal sensations. Given
the complementary nature of the self/other poles of mentalizing, we can expect that anAvoidant Personality Disorder 213
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
excessive focus on the self occurs at the expense of accurate mentalizing of the other. The
apparent “zero-sum game ”of self or other mentalizing occurs because self-as-target
mentalizing inevitably diverts attention from the other toward the self. As individuals
with AvPD avoid genuine consideration of the other ’s mental state, the excessive
activation of self-mentalizing may simultaneously bias inferences about the other ’s
thoughts and feelings so that they are more like the internal state of the self. In other
words, the experience is that “others see me as I see myself .”
The bias that prioritizes content relevant to the self also colors inferences about the
mental state of the other. As seen in studies of categorizing faces depicting fear expres-
sions [ 38], the bias away from the other may cause impairments of judgment that reduce
the accuracy of other-focused mentalizing. Inadequate allocation of cognitive resources
to the other may also contribute to more serious dysfunctions. The lack of resources may
lead to a disconnection of physical reality from other-focused mentalizing, which comes
to be characterized by hypermentalizing in individuals with AvPD. Thus the inaccuracy
does not only involve difficulty in the recognition of internal and external signals of
mental states. More seriously, the lack of attention paid to such signals, caused by a
negative, hypermentalizing focus on the self, means that the individual does not receive
valuable social information that might counter the spiral of negative self-mentalizing.
Consistent with these assumptions, brain imaging studies have shown increased ventral
mPFC activation in socially anxious individuals, reflecting the greater salience of self-
related stimuli [ 39].
When describing the self/other dimension of mentalizing in Chapter 2 we discussed
biases that can arise when the source of information for mentalizing is not the external
world, but is inappropriately drawn from either the point of view of the self or the
perspective of the other. The former is commonly referred to as egocentric bias [40],
whereas the latter is known as altercentric bias [41,42]. Although the inevitable pull to
take the other ’s perspective into consideration may cause problems in some contexts
(e.g., excessive vulnerability to mimicry in BPD), altercentric bias is not a prominent
problem in AvPD. Disorders associated with avoidance are good examples of the
substantial problems involved in mentalizing another person ( “other-as-target ”mental-
izing) when the source of information for this actually comes from the self. To overcome
egocentric bias it is necessary to contrast the information available to the self with the
information available about the mental state of the other [ 43]. In situations of pressure
(e.g., negative self-appraisal in an interpersonal context), this will be beyond the capacity
of someone with AvPD.
Clinical experience confirms that mentalizing in which the self is the source of
information about the mental state of the other is common in AvPD; this has also been
noted to commonly occur in individuals with social anxiety [ 44]. We assume that
individuals with AvPD generate images of themselves in social situations that are
supposed to reflect the perception of others. However, these images are deeply affected
by egocentric bias and reflect negative internal self-perspectives. This tendency is self-
sustaining because it precludes acquiring information that is inconsistent with the
egocentric understanding. In the absence of new information, the progression is
restricted to ever more detailed analysis of the sparse data accessible to the individual.
The hypermentalizing typical of AvPD reflects the limitation of egocentricity ( “self-as-
source ”mentalizing), and may be a part of the general picture of ruminative hyper-
mentalizing in people with a predisposition toward avoidance [ 45,46].214 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
As we have seen, the subjective experience of AvPD entails the construction of
memories and mental images that reflect the individual ’s interpersonal interactions with
their social world. In principle, these images can be constructed from a first-person
perspective (i.e., seen through the eyes of the self) or a third-person perspective (i.e.,
where a visual image of the self is constructed and is perceived as an object of the mental
image) [ 47]. It has been suggested that the difference between the two forms of imagery
reflects a level of abstraction [ 48]. The first-person perspective reflects experiential and
concrete aspects of the event, whereas the third-person or observer perspective reflects
the overarching personal meaning of the experience that is remembered [ 48,49].
This differentiation may also be true of mental-state attributions, where first-person
imagery corresponds to concrete interpretations of action whereas third-person imagery
reflects abstract interpretations [ 34]. People who are socially anxious form images of
themselves as social objects. They imagine themselves from a third-person perspective
that depicts how others might be thinking of them. The dominance of the self pole in
mentalizing means that this image is based on their own feelings and experiences. Use of
the third-person perspective to depict social situations in memory, thus eliciting a more
abstract level of processing, may be one of the underlying causes of the highly embedded
negative self-mentalizing that is characteristic of a high level of social avoidance.
Avoidance may be a consequence of generalizing the thinking where the self is perceived
as an object; it is re-experienced from the third-person perspective, giving it a semblance
of reality that is not in fact based on any real social information. However, the abstrac-
tion involved in this third-person perspective solidifies the negative self-image in a
generalized structure of “me as I am seen. ”The third-person (self-as-object) perspective
“bakes in ”negative content into self-imagery that is already negative. Seeing oneself in
one’s mind ’s eye as inadequate, embarrassing, laughed at, or awkward becomes an
inescapable image that is ready to return whenever the “me-mode ”of how the individual
is seen is activated. Furthermore, when anxious individuals use such images, they may be
readily generalized across contexts and settings because of their abstract nature, invading
situations that are historical but in which the image is now irrelevant, or infiltrating
anticipated future events that serve to justify avoidance in all similar situations.
Summary of the Mentalizing Formulation for AvPD
Avoidance is an extreme form of psychic equivalence. The outcomes imagined by the
patient with AvPD are in all respects reality and must, at all costs, be avoided. Psychic
equivalence exaggerates consequences, and in the imagination of the patient the possible
outcomes of action are often catastrophic. Reflection and explicit mentalizing are not
available to counter these imagined outcomes, and the fear becomes untethered. The
ultimate frightening consequence is the complete loss of agency (control) and consequent
humiliation, denigration, or ridicule. The agency denied to the self is attributed to the
other, who acquires unusual power and an almost oppressive destructive influence over the
self. The escape from the oppression of this “inevitable ”feared imagined consequence is a
pervasive adoption of pretend mode —the separation of subjective from physical reality
through an escape into meaningless detail that serves to enable avoidance. The extreme
psychic equivalence entails the bodily self and physical reactions. Thus the person with
AvPD can imagine bodily reactions consistent with their subjective state, such as blushing,
and be convinced that anyone observing them will notice their emotional response.Avoidant Personality Disorder 215
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
We have noted the absence of reflective explicit mentalizing and the dominance of
cognition over emotion (with some indications of alexithymia) in people with AvPD. We
also suspect that anomalies in the interoceptive experience associated with linking
emotional arousal to external circumstance may underpin the alexithymic experience
of those with AvPD. Three aspects of the self/other dimension may be relevant to therapy
with patients with AvPD:
1. the inappropriate dominance of the self as a target of mentalizing
2. the source of information for mentalizing being the self
3. the mental representation, principally in imagery, of past and future experience being
dominated by a third-person rather than first-person perspective.
These and similar biases in relation to other disorders covered in the different
chapters of this book have been noted. The preference for inferring one ’s own mental
states rather than focusing on those of others may be characteristic of depression, post-
traumatic stress disorder, and NPD. It may in fact be the kind of transdiagnostic
indicator of psychopathology that the notion of the “p factor ”(discussed in Chapter 2 )
logically demands [ 39]. Similarly, the egocentricity bias, which may be better interpreted
as difficulty in inhibiting a self-perspective, may be dominant in AvPD because process-
ing of the self demands fewer cognitive resources than directing attention to the other.
Again, this is unlikely to be specific to AvPD. Finally, the predisposition to view the self
from outside —to take the perspective of an observer who is imagined to be objective but
of course is not —may be something that AvPD shares with all or most other personality
disorders. If it were to be demonstrated that the third-person perspective in representing
memories and creating images of a potential future is favored in all personality disorders,
this might help to explain why these disorders have traditionally been considered to be
more stable and less likely to change with the passage of time. The argument in relation
to the observer perspective is that seeing oneself from the outside is likely to give the
event an overarching personal meaning combined with a paralyzing sense that this
perspective must be shared by everyone and so must be objectively true [ 48,49]. The
sense of certainty and significance that such a perspective creates makes it difficult to
shift, even if circumstances change.
Treatment Approach
In general, the treatment approach to AvPD requires patience and detailed scrutiny of
the often sparse material that the patient brings. Engaging with this in a sensitive way
that reflects interest, genuine curiosity, and compassion in relation to the pain and
distress just below the surface of the ideas being presented is an important and signifi-
cant therapeutic challenge. In contrast to the issues that emerge with the “dramatic ”
cluster of personality disorders, here the technical challenge is to prevent total avoidance
and eschew the acceptance of easy solutions, and to achieve this without generating a
level of anxiety that a person with AvPD is unlikely to be able to manage effectively.
If we consider the establishment of epistemic trust as being the core feature of the MBT
approach to treating personality disorders, we can see the combination of anxiety and
fearful attachment as initiating and maintaining the persistence of epistemic hypervigilance
and as a barrier to the re-establishment of epistemic trust. The goal of MBT in AvPD, as
in all other disorders, is to regain the patient ’s mentalizing. Given the formulation
described in the previous section, the reason why the anomaly characterized as AvPD216 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
can occur and be maintained is the failure of appropriate balanced mentalizing of self and
other. Therefore, in individuals in whom AvPD is a significant feature, the clinician has to:
/C15reduce the influence of the “inner eye ”
/C15discourage the self from being “lent to ”the other
/C15minimize the obsessive turning on the self, negatively appraising and scrutinizing
its activities.
In addition, the clinician needs to consider:
/C15psychic equivalence bundled as the whole way of experiencing the self in a social
world; the clinician must help the patient to calibrate internal experience against
external reality, using explicit mentalizing to bring uncertainty and perspective
/C15hypermentalizing pretend mode as a dominant non-mentalizing mode, with avoidant
hypomentalizing as a way of managing overly painful dysregulated internal states
within social contexts, including therapeutic encounters.
The first step is to enshrine the work within the MBT formulation.
Formulation
From the perspective of an MBT treatment protocol, the clinical formulation translates
fairly simply into clinical priorities that guide practice in relation to AvPD. A clear priority
is to address the imbalance between self and other mentalizing, and treatment of AvPD
calls for a specific shift in self/other mentalizing. The clinician needs to pay special
attention to instances where the self is inappropriately or overly readily used as the target
of mentalizing. The specific problems resulting from overuse of the self as the main focus
for all mentalizing need to be identified, agreed with the patient as problem areas, and then
illustrated with examples from the patient ’s life. MBT asks clinicians to routinely assist the
shift from self to other, and from other to self, with the aim of increasing the flexibility of
mentalizing —that is, to use contrary moves (see Chapter 4 ). This remains a priority, and
should be explicitly identified as a process that the clinician will insist on working on.
Supporting patients in the task of inferring mental states in all of the protagonists in a
particular setting is perhaps the highest priority for intervention. The clinician and the
patient need to become alert to mental states of the self being offered as explanations for
the outcome of social situations without appropriate consideration of the role that others
may have had. Using standard MBT techniques, the clinician should express curiosity
and concern about the accuracy of judgments in relation to the other when these
judgments appear to be based on inadequate attention being given to the subjective
experience of the other. Failure to free up the mentalizing process through the use of a
not-knowing stance in this situation indicates that the use of role plays or a game
centered on an aspect of the social narrative might be helpful.
Clinical Example: The Formulation Discussed with Jane
Here is a summary covering a few things we have talked about.
1. We have noted that you spend a lot of time thinking about yourself and trying to work
out why you are like you are. You mentioned that you have tried to put things down in
writing and tell stories about yourself. While you have been doing that, you always comeAvoidant Personality Disorder 217
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
back to how negative you are about yourself and how you think you are “weird, ”just like
your brother told you. It is really difficult for you to see yourself in any other way.
Focus for treatment: How you see yourself. ( Self representation —mentalizing I-mode. )
2. When you are with others you always find yourself looking at them as if you are not
really with them. There is a distance between you and them, and you think that you
don’t understand something about being with other people that they do seem to. You
imagine all the time that they see you like you see yourself —as“weird ”again, perhaps.
Focus for treatment: What happens between you and other people, and how do
you work out what is in their minds and what they actually think about you? ( Other
second-order representation system and other-to-self mentalizing —me-mode and
personalized me-mode. )
3. You want to hide a lot of the time, and this helps on the one hand but on the other it
increases the pain of your isolation, which is something you want to change.
Focus for treatment: Consider times when you know you are melting into the
background and what makes you have to do that. What might happen if you don ’t?
(Using narrative of events to focus on experience and avoidance processes in real time. )
4. You have lots of understanding about your story and have been over it many times. We
should respect that and of course refer to it, but it might help if we avoid too much
going over and over it, as you have already done that.
Focus for treatment: Let’s look out for when we both start explaining things more
and more only to find that things don ’t change. ( Attempt to sensitize both the
clinician and the patient to hypermentalizing as a block to progress. )
5. You and I seem to come to a full stop when we are thinking about things sometimes.
Can we agree to notice those times and for both of us to search in ourselves to explore
what has happened? I think it might be important to go back to see what is happening,
as it tends to make it seem like there is a disconnect.
Focus for treatment: Any disconnection as we try to open up a discussion. ( This is
an affect focus, locating a relational interference in treatment that might be part of
Jane’s ingrained avoidance pattern. )
6. Let ’s look at the relationships that you have. You mentioned how you long for
connection with other people and to stop feeling you are “looking in. ”You want
relationships but you also dread people being close and asking you to be with them. In
the end you think it is better to be alone, but you don ’t want that either.
Focus for treatment: Perhaps we will call it “Fear and Longing ”so that we can start to
work out when it is really strong in you and what is bringing it to the foreground.
(A shorthand phrase summarizing the content for discussion in the subsequent sessions .)
This is enough to be going on with. We can change all this as we go along if it does not
seem to be relevant.
Side Effects of the Intervention to Be Noted in the Formulation
The main risk in the treatment of AvPD is that of encouraging pseudomentalizing, so
this is highlighted in the formulation —for example, “We can easily get into an over-218 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
detailed discussion and not see the wood for the trees. Perhaps we can both be aware of
when this is happening and stop to consider what we night be missing .”In the formulation
discussed with Jane (see previous box) this is noted in point 4 as something for both
parties to look out for —also referred to in MBT as something to “Notice and Name ”(see
Chapter 4 ).
How can this risk be mitigated when it happens, as it surely will? By stopping and
exploring! Stopping the patient in order to take time to acquire information relevant to
judging the mental state of another actor, closely following the inferences drawn, and
mildly challenging the patient when necessary become a staple part of the intervention
with AvPD.
Reducing the Influence of the “Inner Eye ”: Tackling Excessive Focus on Self
to Understand Others
A further priority is to look out for content that suggests egocentricity bias. These are
instances when self/other distinctions are blurred and the self is focused on excessively as
the most appropriate source of information about others. Such instances are likely to be
very common, and must be repeatedly identified and questioned. We assume that the
mental state of the other is avoided systematically in part because of the anticipation of
mental pain. This may be true, but we also know that egocentricity bias for an individual
with a profoundly negative self-image generates just as much or perhaps even more
mental pain in relation to the social environment as the inaccurate judgment of the
mental state of the other might do. Therefore the counteracting of avoidance is just part
of what is necessary. The move away from egocentricity bias has two separate
requirements.
1.It should enable the emergence of a genuine other through the usual steps of
empathic validation, clarification, and presenting an alternative perspective. The
clinician sensitively asks the patient to consider all of the participants in any
narrative. The other person has to emerge from the narrative gradually and be
experienced from a range of perspectives:
(a) the protagonist ’s own perspective (what they thought and might have felt); can
the patient consider this?
Clinical Example: The Other Person Experienced from Jane ’s Perspective
JANE:They looked at me in a funny way. They were seeing me as weird as usual.
CLINICIAN (EXAMPLE QUESTIONS ):How do you get to that? What were you picking up there? Was this an
external focus of mentalizing, based on their facial expression or their tone of voice?
(b) the patient ’s perspective —what they knew for certain and what their imagination
adds to complete the picture (as everyone ’s imagination does): “How come you are
so certain? What effect did it have on you that you read it like this? ”Does the
patient describe the experience as if it is objectively real truth that would be
shared by the world in general, or can they describe it as an idiosyncratic,
personal point of view? If they describe a more generalized understanding of the
protagonist, this needs to be sensitively challenged.Avoidant Personality Disorder 219
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
(c) the perspective of a genuine observer —for example, what the clinician would have
made of it independent of the subjectivities of all those involved: “If I was there,
I would have thought this, given what you are saying. ”
(d) the vicarious perspectives of other protagonists if they are part of the picture (i.e.,
if there are at least two protagonists in addition to the patient): “How did John see
Fiona, do you think? What did that tell you about Fiona? Was he right? How does
that compare with what you thought ?”
This should not be mechanistically performed with each related episode, but
dynamically explored across many such situations. But multiple perspectives
should be encouraged as appropriate in relation to each incident. It is essential
that Jane reflects on the difference between what she sees others were thinking
and how they were reacting, and what this tells her about the “third ”person
(observer) perspective that she failed to recognize.
2.It should support the inhibition of egocentricity. If egocentricity is not inhibited,
concern about a real other, even if it gradually emerges, will never flourish. The
predisposition to egocentricity is strongly established and has a powerful defensive
function, reducing severe mental pain. The challenge is to create an attractive and
non-anxiety-generating alternative. Perhaps this is best achieved not by
confrontation but by a persistent request to “move beyond egocentricity. ”The
inhibition of egocentricity is not achieved by demolishing it but by enrichment of the
mentalizing alternative. Identifying positive cognitions (admiration, affection,
concern, empathy, interest, or even love) in the other, to replace the self-generated
negative mentalizing, may in itself create intrinsic value that overrides avoidance. Of
course, progress will be slower if the patient ’s social environment is negative and so
they are genuinely surrounded by hostile attitudes, but this does not mean that the
clinician should be deflected from the task.
Calibrating Internal Experience and External Reality: Affect Focus and
Relational Mentalizing
Psychic equivalence, when bundled into the whole structure of AvPD, needs more
diversion than is commonly used in the MBT intervention for psychic equivalence (see
Chapter 4 ). One way to begin to generate less certainty and dysregulation and to reduce
anxiety —all of which create such distress in a patient who is functioning in psychic
equivalence —is to introduce games. Games can be used as a way into an underlying
affect focus, the “elephant in the room. ”The clinician explores the barriers and limits of
the patient ’s experience in role play to generate a modestly uncomfortable but more
bearable state than would be generated by working directly on the therapeutic relational
process, which is so heavily intruded upon by self-bias. Relational mentalizing interven-
tions directed toward the detail of the patient –clinician interaction are likely to engender
too much anxiety and lead either to pretend-mode hypermentalizing or to behavioral
and mental avoidance with hypomentalizing.
An inverted role play to explore a problematic interaction between the clinician and
patient can be started by the clinician stating: “Imagine that I am you and you are me ...
I am telling you how I feel, and you, as the therapist, will have to respond to what I am
saying .”Less problematic in terms of anxiety for the patient is role play based on an
interaction the patient reports as having been difficult.220 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Clinical Example: Jane (continued)
CLINICIAN :Let’s take that example of you being at work with your colleague. They were asking you
about what you had done with a specific tax form and whether you had assessed it as requiring
investigation. I am going to be you and you can be your colleague.
(beginning the role play )
CLINICIAN AS JANE:(taking her immediate negative self-experience ) Why are you asking me? Do you
think I did the wrong thing?
JANE AS COLLEAGUE :Oh. I don ’t know. I didn ’t mean that, I don ’t think.
CLINICIAN AS JANE:Well, what did you mean?
JANE AS COLLEAGUE :I wanted to know what you thought.
CLINICIAN AS JANE:Oh well, I thought it did mean you thought I ’d done the wrong thing. I suppose
that was just my assumption.
The role play is highlighting the negative self and is now beginning to expose Jane ’s
personal sense of shame within the negative self-experience that she applies to others.
This can then be explored further in different contexts of her interactions. Jane and the
clinician focus on what happened, while maintaining a mentalizing stance: “What do you
think about my reactions? How close are they to yours? What do you think about how
accurate my understanding of your motives was? The clinician will also say what their
experience was.
Role play is one type of game that is designated as “play”or“pretend, ”and is
therefore acceptable to the person whose primary mode of coping is via this mechanism.
They can appear to be in something rather than being in it in reality. They can approach
others ’mental states without infusing them solely with their own. Yet although the
patient ’s habitual motive for pretending is avoidance, in the context of therapeutic games
it becomes its polar opposite and in MBT terminology would be called a compassionate
challenge . However, as with other modes of challenge in MBT, the aim is not merely
experiential but is keenly focused on the recovery of mentalizing.
Games that are focused on what is going on in minds can be organized. For example,
the“mind –brain scans ”that are used in family work (see Chapter 15 ) can be used.
Clinical Example: Mind –Brain Scan Used with Jane
The clinician gives Jane a drawing of an outline of a brain showing the ventricles and
surrounding areas. The outline is modified with a number of blank spaces to be filled
in—“me,”“them, ”“them about me, ”and “me about them. ”
CLINICIAN :Jane, here is an outline of a brain and its structure. But it has some blank spaces, so that
we can work out what the brain is up to and treat it as if it was a person ’s mind. The spaces are
there for us to write in what people think. Imagine that this is your colleague. You write in what
was going on in his mind and I will write in what I was hearing, too.
What makes this and other games therapeutic is not just that they encourage the
elaboration of mental states. The main benefit is that they bring about communicationAvoidant Personality Disorder 221
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
about mental states between people. Therefore games like this must be undertaken in an
atmosphere of fun —for example, the clinician can write things that Jane might feel are
ridiculous, even though they may have some validity.
Games in themselves are not considered to be an end point in MBT. They are
important stimuli that start from clinician-directed explicit exposition of mental states
and move gradually toward more patient-owned and implicit reflection. Importantly,
they can also be used to generate a trusting relationship between the patient and the
clinician. The joint experience of “having fun ”while playing can create a “we-mode ”in
the consulting room, triggering epistemic trust, which paves the way for credible
reassurance and acceptable advice giving.
Counter-Relational Responsiveness
Perhaps a less obvious aspect of the engagement in play is its function in modifying the
clinician ’s counter-response to the patient. As we pointed out earlier in this chapter, the
pervasive avoidance of AvPD patients may lead to frustration and ultimately loss of agency
in the clinician. Hitting one ’s head against a brick wall is rarely an edifying and liberating
process. Games can help the clinician to regain agency in a relational context where an
avoidant person ’s configuration of the therapeutic dialogue deprives them of a significant
part. Games can be helpful in countering not only avoidance in the patient but also the
secondary avoidance of the clinician. “It is quite difficult for me when you are unable to say
more (avoidance has been triggered) as eventually my mind dries up and I am not sure what
to ask or what to suggest. I am not sure what has happened at the moment but my mind has
gone blank, as if I am giving up a chase. Maybe I need a bit of therapy from you to free my
mind up (playfulness), as I know this happens to you a lot. How do you get your mind back? ”
Like patients with BPD, many individuals with AvPD fear abandonment [ 50], but
often they also have a sense of being controlled, criticized, and ridiculed, without being
able to mentalize explicitly that this is what is going on inside them. Therefore the humor
within a counter-relational intervention such as the example just given has to be used
carefully and with compassion both toward oneself as a clinician and toward the patient.
Sometimes the patient ’s fear of abandonment can manifest as passive-aggressive behav-
ior, but most commonly it is apparent as a feeling in the clinician of not “being on the
same wavelength ”as the patient. The clinician needs to be aware that such reactions from
the patient are not necessarily about discomfort with affiliation, but may equally have
been triggered by the patient feeling that their autonomy is being threatened.
Hypermentalizing in Pretend Mode
The primary mode of mentalizing that causes clinical difficulty in AvPD is hypermental-
izing. This is also seen in BPD, where challenge (see Chapter 4 ) is more feasible than it is
in AvPD, and it is especially common among adolescents (see Chapter 14), who hyper-
mentalize to reduce confusion, and in doing so become isolated from their peers. In people
with AvPD the motivation is more likely to be the avoidance of anticipated criticism and
also the need for approval and acceptance —particularly in the therapeutic setting, in which
patients talk about things in a way that initially appears relevant and salient to their
problems. However, patients with AvPD focus on micro aspects of a mentalizing inter-
change or interpersonal event and consider it from so many perspectives, with an endless
array of unlikely implications, that the meaning of the encounter is impossible to re-create.222 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The clinician (like all of those communicating with the patient) tends to lose the thread
of the patient ’s exploration, which may be focused on seemingly insignificant aspects. The
result is another experience in which, from the patient ’s perspective, mentalizing leads to
abandonment and rejection, and they feel isolated, exhausted, and unsupported. There is a
massive communication gap, with the patient and the clinician each in their own “silos. ”
The patient ’s cognitive pseudomentalizing, focusing on ineffectively understood internal
indicators of thought and superficially appreciated emotions, feels deeply unsatisfactory to
the clinician, who will struggle to find common ground with the patient. In therapy with
AvPD patients, the aim should be to reverse this process and judiciously balance gentle
exploration with maintaining safety as they move attention consistently to the outside and
to the emotional, away from the soulless focus on the internal, fearful, hypermentalizing
position (about being liked or disliked) in which the patient is trapped.
Playfulness in MBT
The embedded nature of ineffective mentalizing in AvPD and the severity of the relational
and counter-relational problems encountered in treatment suggest that additions to the
MBT model are required. Playfulness is a key part of the MBT core model, but is used
more explicitly as an intervention for mental avoidance. It has been noted that patients
with AvPD have marked difficulty in accessing feelings of play and curiosity [ 51]. In MBT
work with couples and families (see Chapters 15 and16) the judicious use of structured
role plays and of video feedback helps to create an atmosphere that is conducive to
mentalizing, even in families where the avoidance of mentalizing is dominant.
Structured “mentalizing games ”challenge avoidance and generate an experience of a safe
(playful) non-consequential alternative. As described earlier in this chapter, very simple
role plays, which involve simple implementations such as switching roles ( “stepping into
someone else ’s shoes ”), are widely used. When working with individuals with high levels of
alexithymia, games such as the “feeling finder game, ”in which emotions written on cards
drawn from a deck have to be enacted, and others playing the game have to role play the
emotion in the same way as the original protagonist if they draw the same card, can be
useful. More complex but quite effective role-playing games involve planning challenging
interpersonal encounters and “preparing ”for these with the clinician adopting (sometimes
in challenging ways) the role of the patient ’s protagonist. On occasion the clinician may
provide a coping model to support the patient coping with challenging situations. The
content of such extensions to the MBT protocol matters less than the general attitude of
inconsequentiality (playfulness) that is created in the consulting room by their use. These
games serve to shatter the tyranny of psychic equivalence for the patient.
Memory Elaboration and Imagery
A further technical initiative that is suggested by the mentalizing formulation involves
supporting the elaboration of memory and even the fantasy imagery of the patient. The
patient ’s bias toward presenting a self-as-object view can be addressed by asking them to
provide less abstract and more concrete imagery. This forces the patient to create and
present a self-as-subject perspective. The patient may be all too ready to present such
detail in terms of a self-perception (another example of egocentricity), but the clinician
needs to gently decline and sideline this in favor of requesting a view of others in relation
to the particular event that is being discussed. Whereas excessive detail should be aAvoidant Personality Disorder 223
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
warning sign of hypermentalizing in relation to the dominance of the self on the self/
other dimension, in this instance detail close to physical reality, such as perceptual detail,
images, and sound, strengthened by guided imagery in relation to the physical context of
the event, is a legitimate way of ensuring that “me-mode ”is avoided.
In the authors ’experience, dramatic interventions such as mischievous or “wacky ”
challenges, which are sometimes used in MBT for BPD, are rarely effective in AvPD. It is
relatively easy to cause intense emotion in the consulting room, but quite hard to contain
it once it has become part of the interpersonal reality between the patient and the
clinician. Increasing emotional arousal deliberately when it is chronically low is part of
MBT ’s toolbox. However, implementation of this tool requires sensitivity and some skill.
Confronting a patient who has a tendency to overlook alternative explanations for a
reaction of, for example, disappointment from someone else that they themselves
immediately (but erroneously) attribute to themselves as the cause may not bring with
it the desired consequence of increased concern with and interest in the other —“What
makes you so disappointed? ”is substituted in the patient ’s mind with “I am so disap-
pointing and you know it .”In fact, making the other ’s mental state a more concrete part
of therapeutic shared reality may be a counterproductive move. We recommend the use
of traditional MBT techniques of puzzlement, surprise, and the not-knowing/inquisitive
stance accompanied by empathy in relation to the reaction of disappointment before the
context of the event is explored in too much detail. Once there is a solid platform of
shared understanding this might indeed increase the potential for alternative explan-
ations. Using a collaborative (democratic) approach will ultimately pay dividends where,
as often as possible, discovery is left to the patient rather than to the impatient clinician.
Supervision
Supervision by senior practitioners and peer discussion of one ’s work is a central part of
MBT (see also Chapter 4 ). It is important that clinicians working with patients with
AvPD are able to discuss their patients and receive regular supervision, to avoid them
colluding with the patient ’s avoidance or acting out feelings of boredom. Above all,
clinicians need help in order to stay emotionally alive. The tendency for the clinician to
join in with hypermentalizing modes is a constant pitfall and may only become apparent
in discussion with others. Finally, the repetitiveness and circularity of the conversation
and the poverty of the content can have a crushing effect on the mentalizing of the
clinician, who becomes unable to think clearly in sessions. Supervision can support the
clinician in maintaining their own mentalizing and retaining the ability to take a curated
and coherent approach that is linked directly to the mentalizing formulation, rather than
becoming lost in a labyrinthine and over-detailed exploration of the patient ’s world.
MBT-Compatible Evidence-Based Approaches to AvPD
There is limited clinical empirical evidence to support a mentalization-based approach to
treating AvPD [ 14]. To our knowledge there have been no trials of MBT for AvPD, so we
reach to techniques and evidence from interventions that are compatible with MBT. By
“compatible, ”we mean techniques that explicitly address mentalizing capacity in a
manner that respects the limitations of social cognition and does not appear to under-
mine the individual capacity for processing change. Both schema-focused therapy (SFT)
and metacognitive interpersonal therapy (MIT) follow some of the principles —adopted224 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
in this book —of focusing on a formulation of the patient ’s core difficulties that then
dictates specifically tailored approaches to therapy.
By and large, integrative third-wave cognitive therapies fit into this pattern, as they draw
on ideas and techniques from various theoretical orientations. SFT, in common with MBT,
builds on attachment theory, as well as on elements of psychodynamic and experiential
therapies [ 52]. SFT focuses on the various maladaptive coping modes that an individual
internalized in childhood and continues to use in adult life. In AvPD, the “detached
protector ”mode, defined as disengaging from inner emotions, experiences, thoughts, and
feelings, and from people, provides a formulation not dissimilar to the one outlined here for
use in MBT. The motivational processes are also analogous to those in MBT, specifying that
protection of the individual from feelings of loneliness and inferiority is at the core of the
conceptualization. In parallel with the central place that MBT gives to epistemic trust, SFT
considers fears of others ’evaluations to be the source of the pervasive suspiciousness that
characterizes the attitude of patients with AvPD. As with MBT, therapeutic techniques are
personalized and directive, with the therapeutic relationship providing corrective interper-
sonal experiences to address issues of mistrust and the detachment from internal experience
in self and other. Some limited empirical support for SFT comes from observational studies
[53], generally for patients with cluster C (avoidant, dependent, and obsessive) personality
disorders, who show lower dropout rates and better recovery with SFT compared with
treatment as usual or clarification-oriented therapy [ 54].
MIT is influenced by narrative and relational approaches to personality disorders, as
well as ideas from psychodynamic therapies, including MBT [ 55]. It assumes that
anomalies in metacognitive abilities —mental operations aimed at decoding and under-
standing the mental states of self and others —and related dysfunctions, such as
alexithymia, play a role in the phenomenology and experience of personality disorder
[56]. In the formulation of AvPD, MIT also emphasizes the over-regulation of emotion
(i.e., a controlled/reflectiveness bias on the automatic/controlled dimension) together
with inhibition of affect (i.e., a cognitive bias on the cognitive/affective dimension) and
avoidance of social interactions (teleological mode —assuming that physical avoidance
can circumvent the confrontation of internal states), as well as relational avoidance
(MBT would see this as the culmination of ineffective mentalizing). MIT, like MBT,
focuses on interpersonal episodes to create awareness and to develop formulations,
which inevitably address failures of mentalizing, to help to change patients ’interpersonal
schemas. MIT uses MBT-like interventions to reduce general distress; these interventions
aim to improve metacognitive functioning, including a focus on narrative integrative
capabilities, generating a sense of agency and self- and interpersonal functioning, and
addressing affect dysregulation [ 55,56]. The current evidence base in relation to MIT for
AvPD consists largely of uncontrolled case (or case series) studies [ 56–58].
Other psychotherapeutic orientations that are less compatible with MBT have also
reported relevant work with patients with AvPD, including acceptance and commitment
therapy combined with dialectical behavior therapy [ 59], radically open dialectical
behavior therapy [ 60], and interpersonal psychotherapy [ 61].
Concluding Remarks
MBT-AvPD follows all the principles of the mentalizing approach, with the clear aim of
establishing more effective and stable mentalizing that is more adaptive and flexible inAvoidant Personality Disorder 225
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
relation to the patient ’s social world. The initial phase of formulation and agreement of
aims is the basis of treatment. The not-knowing stance is crucial to prevent the clinician
from filling in for the patient ’s poverty of mental-state understanding. Importantly, a
mentalizing profile, most often centered around hypermentalizing and hypomentalizing
modes and self/other dimensional problems, is established and shared between the
patient and the clinician, and its use and misuse as the patient engages with their social
world is then systematically explored. Focused work on the imbalance of mentalizing
dimensions, especially minimizing the overuse of the self, is central to the treatment of
patients with AvPD, as is the discovery of the other ’s mental states from the perspective
of the other, rather than being based on self-biases. To this end, additional techniques for
triggering the self/other mentalizing process without engendering excessive anxiety,
including games and playfulness, are used by the clinician. Eventually, exploration of
the momentary relational processes in the session, with careful marking and contingent
responsiveness from the clinician, can be harnessed to generate in the patient a more
genuine experience of others ’mental states.
References
1. American Psychiatric Association.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders , 5th ed. Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Association,
2013.
2. World Health Organization. ICD-11:
International Classification of Diseases
11th Revision . 2019. https://icd.who.int/ .
3. American Psychiatric Association.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders . 4th ed., text rev.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association, 2000.
4. Millon T. Disorders of Personality:
Introducing a DSM/ICD Spectrum from
Normal Styles to Abnormal Types , 3rd ed.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
5. Alden LE, Laposa JM, Taylor CT, Ryder
AG. Avoidant personality disorder:
current status and future directions. J Pers
Disord 2002; 16:1–29.
6. Winarick DJ, Bornstein RF. Toward
resolution of a longstanding controversy
in personality disorder diagnosis:
contrasting correlates of schizoid and
avoidant traits. Pers Indiv Diff 2015; 79:
25–9.
7. Lampe L, Malhi GS. Avoidant personality
disorder: current insights. Psychol Res
Behav Manag 2018; 11:5 5–66.8. Wright AG, Pincus AL, Conroy DE, Elliot
AJ. The pathoplastic relationship between
interpersonal problems and fear of
failure. J Pers 2009; 77: 997 –1024.
9. Marques L, Porter E, Keshaviah A et al.
Avoidant personality disorder in
individuals with generalized social anxiety
disorder: what does it add? J Anxiety
Disord 2012; 26: 665 –72.
10. Eikenaes I, Hummelen B, Abrahamsen G
et al. Personality functioning in patients
with avoidant personality disorder and
social phobia. J Pers Disord 2013; 27:
746–63.
11. Carr SN, Francis AJP. Do early
maladaptive schemas mediate the
relationship between childhood
experiences and avoidant personality
disorder features? A preliminary
investigation in a non-clinical sample.
Cogn Ther Res 2010; 34:
343–58.
12. Eikenaes I, Pedersen G, Wilberg T.
Attachment styles in patients with
avoidant personality disorder compared
with social phobia. Psychol Psychother
2016; 89: 245 –60.
13. Riggs SA, Paulson A, Tunnell E et al.
Attachment, personality, and
psychopathology among adult inpatients:
self-reported romantic attachment style
versus Adult Attachment Interview states226 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
of mind. Dev Psychopathol 2007; 19:
263–91.
14. Simonsen S, Euler S. Avoidant and
narcissistic personality disorder. In:
Bateman AW, Fonagy P, eds. Handbook
of Mentalizing in Mental Health Practice ,
2nd ed. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association Publishing, 2019;
351–68.
15. Beeney JE, Stepp SD, Hallquist MN et al.
Attachment and social cognition in
borderline personality disorder:
specificity in relation to antisocial and
avoidant personality disorders. Personal
Disord 2015; 6: 207 –15.
16. Antonsen BT, Johansen MS, Ro FG et al.
Is reflective functioning associated with
clinical symptoms and long-term course
in patients with personality disorders?
Compr Psychiatry 2016; 64:
46–58.
17. Pellecchia G, Moroni F, Colle L et al.
Avoidant personality disorder and social
phobia: does mindreading make the
difference? Compr Psychiatry 2018; 80:
163–9.
18. Moroni F, Procacci M, Pellecchia G et al.
Mindreading dysfunction in avoidant
personality disorder compared with other
personality disorders. J Nerv Ment Dis
2016; 204: 752 –7.
19. Fonagy P, Target M. Playing with reality:
I. Theory of mind and the normal
development of psychic reality. Int
J Psychoanal 1996; 77: 217 –33.
20. Target M, Fonagy P. Playing with reality:
II. The development of psychic reality
from a theoretical perspective. Int
J Psychoanal 1996; 77: 459 –79.
21. Normann-Eide E, Johansen MS,
Normann-Eide T et al. Personality
disorder and changes in affect
consciousness: a 3-year follow-up study of
patients with avoidant and borderline
personality disorder. PLoS One 2015; 10:
e0145625.
22. Johansen MS, Normann-Eide E,
Normann-Eide T, Wilberg T. Emotional
dysfunction in avoidant compared to
borderline personality disorder: a study ofaffect consciousness. Scand J Psychol
2013; 54: 515 –21.
23. Denny BT, Fan J, Liu X et al. Elevated
amygdala activity during reappraisal
anticipation predicts anxiety in avoidant
personality disorder. J Affect Disord 2015;
172:1–7.
24. Nicolo G, Semerari A, Lysaker PH et al.
Alexithymia in personality disorders:
correlations with symptoms and
interpersonal functioning. Psychiatry Res
2011; 190:3 7–42.
25. Simonsen S, Eikenaes IU, Bach B et al.
Level of alexithymia as a measure of
personality dysfunction in avoidant
personality disorder. Nord J Psychiatry
2021; 75: 266 –74.
26. Carlson EN, Vazire S, Oltmanns TF. Self-
other knowledge asymmetries in
personality pathology. J Pers 2013; 81:
155–70.
27. Koenigsberg HW, Denny BT, Fan J et al.
The neural correlates of anomalous
habituation to negative emotional
pictures in borderline and avoidant
personality disorder patients. Am
J Psychiatry 2014; 171:8 2–90.
28. Klumpp H, Angstadt M, Phan KL. Insula
reactivity and connectivity to anterior
cingulate cortex when processing threat
in generalized social anxiety disorder. Biol
Psychol 2012; 89: 273 –6.
29. Rosenthal MZ, Kim K, Herr NR et al.
Speed and accuracy of facial expression
classification in avoidant personality
disorder: a preliminary study. Personal
Disord 2011; 2: 327 –34.
30. Kavanagh LC, Winkielman P. The
functionality of spontaneous mimicry
and its influences on affiliation: an
implicit socialization account. Front
Psychol 2016; 7: 458.
31. Kongerslev M, Simonsen S, Bo S. The
quest for tailored treatments: a meta-
discussion of six social cognitive
therapies. J Clin Psychol 2015; 71: 188 –98.
32. Dimaggio G, Lysaker PH, Carcione A
et al. Know yourself and you shall know
the other ...to a certain extent: multiple
paths of influence of self-reflection onAvoidant Personality Disorder 227
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
mindreading. Conscious Cogn 2008; 17:
778–89.
33. Dimaggio G, Procacci M, Nicolò G et al.
Poor metacognition in narcissistic and
avoidant personality disorders: four
psychotherapy patients analysed using the
Metacognition Assessment Scale. Clin
Psychol Psychother 2007; 14: 386 –401.
34. Maresh EL, Andrews-Hanna JR. Putting
the“Me”in“Mentalizing ”: multiple
constructs describing Selfversus Other
during mentalizing and implications for
social anxiety disorder. In: Gilead M,
Ochsner K, eds. The Neural Basis of
Mentalizing . Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2021; 629 –58.
35. James W. Principles of Psychology . New
York, NY: Henry Holt, 1890.
36. Bryant L, Coffey A, Povinelli DJ, Pruett
JR, Jr. Theory of Mind experience
sampling in typical adults. Conscious
Cogn 2013; 22: 697 –707.
37. Raffaelli Q, Wilcox R, Andrews-Hanna
JR. The neuroscience of imaginative
thought: an integrative framework. In:
Abraham A, ed. The Cambridge
Handbook of the Imagination .
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 2020; 332 –53.
38. Marsh AA, Blair RJ. Deficits in facial
affect recognition among antisocial
populations: a meta-analysis. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 2008; 32: 454 –65.
39. Andrews-Hanna JR, Christoff K,
O’Connor M. Dynamic regulation of
internal experience: mechanisms of
therapeutic change. In: Lane RD, Nadel L,
eds.The Neuroscience of Enduring
Change: Implications for Psychotherapy .
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
2020; 89 –131.
40. Peters U. Human thinking, shared
intentionality, and egocentric biases. Biol
Philos 2016; 31: 299 –312.
41. Kampis D, Southgate V. Altercentric
cognition: how others influence our
cognitive processing. Trends Cogn Sci
2020; 24: 945 –59.
42. Marshall J, Gollwitzer A, Santos LR. Does
altercentric interference rely onmentalizing?: Results from two level-1
perspective-taking tasks. PLoS One 2018;
13: e0194101.
43. Tamir DI, Mitchell JP. Anchoring and
adjustment during social inferences. J Exp
Psychol Gen 2013; 142: 151 –62.
44. Clark DM. A cognitive model. In: Clark
DM, Wells A, eds. Social Phobia: Diagnosis,
Assessment, and Treatment .N e wY o r k ,N Y :
T h eG u i l f o r dP r e s s ,1 9 9 5 ;6 9 –73.
45. Hezel DM, McNally RJ. Theory of mind
impairments in social anxiety disorder.
Behav Ther 2014; 45: 530 –40.
46. Washburn D, Wilson G, Roes M et al.
Theory of mind in social anxiety disorder,
depression, and comorbid conditions.
J Anxiety Disord 2016; 37:7 1–7.
47. Libby LK, Shaeffer EM, Eibach RP. Seeing
meaning in action: a bidirectional link
between visual perspective and action
identification level. J Exp Psychol Gen
2009; 138: 503 –16.
48. Libby LK, Eibach RP. Visual perspective
in mental imagery: a representational tool
that functions in judgment, emotion, and
self-insight. In: Olson JM, Zanna MP, eds.
Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology , Vol. 44. New York, NY:
Academic Press, 2011; 185 –245.
49. Libby LK, Eibach RP. The role of visual
imagery in social cognition. In: Carlston
DE, ed. The Oxford Handbook of Social
Cognition . Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 2013; 147 –66.
50. Pedersen G, Eikenaes I, Urnes O et al.
Experiences in close relationships –
psychometric properties among patients
with personality disorders. Personal Ment
Health 2015; 9: 208 –19.
51. Karterud S, Pedersen G, Johansen M et al.
Primary emotional traits in patients with
personality disorders. Personal Ment
Health 2016; 10: 261 –73.
52. Fassbinder E, Arntz A. Schema therapy
with emotionally inhibited and fearful
patients. J Contemp Psychother 2019; 49:
7–14.
53. Skewes SA, Samson RA, Simpson SG, van
Vreeswijk M. Short-term group schema228 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
therapy for mixed personality disorders: a
pilot study. Front Psychol 2014; 5:
1592.
54. Bamelis LL, Renner F, Heidkamp D,
Arntz A. Extended Schema Mode
conceptualizations for specific personality
disorders: an empirical study. J Pers
Disord 2011; 25:4 1–58.
55. Dimaggio G, Montano A, Popolo R,
Salvatore G. Metacognitive Interpersonal
Therapy for Personality Disorders:
A Treatment Manual . New York, NY:
Routledge, 2015.
56. Gordon-King K, Schweitzer RD,
Dimaggio G. Metacognitive interpersonal
therapy for personality disorders
featuring emotional inhibition: a multiple
baseline case series. J Nerv Ment Dis 2018;
206: 263 –9.
57. Dimaggio G, Salvatore G, MacBeth A
et al. Metacognitive interpersonal therapy
for personality disorders: a case studyseries. J Contemp Psychother 2017; 47:
11–21.
58. Popolo R, MacBeth A, Canfora F et al.
Metacognitive interpersonal therapy in
groups for over-regulated personality
disorders: a single case study. J Contemp
Psychother 2019; 49:4 9–59.
59. Chan CC, Bach PA, Bedwell JS. An
integrative approach using third-
generation cognitive-behavioral therapies
for avoidant personality disorder. Clin
Case Stud 2015; 14: 466 –81.
60. Lynch TR, Hempel RJ, Dunkley C.
Radically open-dialectical behavior
therapy for disorders of over-control:
signaling matters. Am J Psychother 2015;
69: 141-62.
61. Gilbert SE, Gordon KC. Interpersonal
psychotherapy informed treatment for
avoidant personality disorder with
subsequent depression. Clin Case Stud
2013; 12: 111 –27.Avoidant Personality Disorder 229
h di 00 98088960 4009 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part III
Chapter
9Application and Adaptations for Mental Health
Presentations
Depression
Introduction
Recent reviews and meta-analyses, including more than 500 clinical trials examining the
effects of pharmacotherapy and more than 600 trials of different psychotherapies,
suggest that all bona fide treatments for depression are about as effective as each other
[1,2]. Typically, only around 50% of patients with depression show substantial improve-
ment after treatment. This means that there is a great deal of room for improvement,
particularly in more complex cases [ 3–5]. Mentalizing approaches may be of particular
value here, as mentalization-based treatment (MBT) has been specifically developed to
address temporary or long-term impairments in mentalizing that, as will be described in
more detail in this chapter, are typical of patients with depression across the spectrum of
severity, including patients with substantial features of personality disorder [ 4]. From a
mentalizing perspective, patients who present with depression are on a continuum of
severity based on four related features:
1. the nature of their depressive experiences
2. the extent of mentalizing impairments
3. their dominant attachment style (i.e., organized versus disorganized attachment
strategies)
4. the severity of impairments in epistemic trust (see Table 9.1 ).
Clinical Example: Patients at Different Points on the Spectrum of Severity of Depression
Mark: Mild to Moderate
Mark has been feeling depressed for a few months, ever since he broke up with his
girlfriend, Jenny. Although they still love each other, they realized that they had very
different interests in life. Mark always valued his closeness with Jenny, but she increasingly
distanced herself from him; she felt that he “suffocated ”her. After a painful separation,
Mark had difficulty concentrating at work and spent most of his leisure time at home,
watching television. His parents are quite concerned about him. They have always had a
loving relationship with their son and they are desperate to help him, but they do not
know how to do this. They have always felt somewhat emotionally disconnected from him.
Mark realizes that something has to change, and has sought help from a mental health
professional. Fairly quickly he becomes able to reflect on his own role in his relationship
break-up, and can work collaboratively with the clinician to explore his pattern of
emotional distancing.
230
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Lucy: Moderate to Severe
Lucy has a history of emotional abuse and neglect. Her parents say that they did their best
to raise her, but they were often not there for her and could also be very critical of her. As a
teenager, Lucy began to rebel, and she became involved in often chaotic romantic
relationships characterized by idealization and denigration. She also began to consume
alcohol excessively and engage in self-harming behavior. Although she struggled at
university, she managed to graduate and to find a good job. However, at work she often
gets into conflicts with colleagues and has felt “underwhelmed ”in recent months. She
feels empty, lonely, and an “emotional wreck. ”
Angela: Severe to Very Severe
Angela was rather an outcast as a child. She had very different interests from other children
and often retreated into her own fantasy world. As a teenager, she experienced little or no
connection with her peers. Around the age of 18, she began to develop delusional ideas
about herself. She felt completely alone in the world, and developed the belief that
something was physically wrong with her —that she was the ugliest woman in the world.
At the intake interview with a clinician she is very agitated; she says she feels completely
exhausted and that she almost constantly thinks about killing herself.
Patients whose depression is at the less severe end of the spectrum benefit most from
a combined mental-process and mental-representation focus in therapy [ 6,7]—that is, an
approach that focuses on distortions in the content of mental representations (cognitive-
affective schemas or internal working models of self and others) alongside a focus on
improving mentalizing (see Table 9.2 ). Dynamic interpersonal therapy (DIT) [ 8], for
instance, is a brief manualized treatment that has been developed for patients with mild
to moderate depression, and which combines a mentalizing (process) focus with a
mental representation focus [ 9]. In patients with marked features of personality disorder,
a mental-representation approach might be iatrogenic, particularly in the early phases of
treatment. Because these patients often have severe impairments in mentalizing and high
levels of epistemic mistrust, they are likely to lack the mentalizing capacities that are
typically required for such a focus, and they may even lack the capacity to establish a
therapeutic alliance because of their profound distrust of others [ 6,7]. Longitudinal
studies of patients with co-occurring major depressive disorder and borderline person-
ality disorder have suggested that unless the personality disorder is treated there will be
only a limited response to treatment of the depression [ 10]. These patients are at great
risk of self-harm and suicide, particularly when they are functioning in teleological mode
(see Chapter 2 ). For these patients, dynamic interpersonal therapy for complex care
(DITCC) [ 11], or, with increasing severity, MBT for personality disorder are indicated.
Both of these treatments have shown good results in patients with depression and
substantial personality problems [ 12].
The mental-process focus that is characteristic of “traditional ”MBT may be most
appropriate for patients whose depression is at the more severe end of the spectrum. For
the most severely depressed patients, MBT for psychosis may be indicated (see
Chapter 10 ). Of course, the distinction between a mental-process focus and a mental-
representation focus is not absolute, and work with depressed patients typically includes
both approaches. For instance, as the patient ’s mentalizing becomes increasingly robust,
the focus in traditional MBT shifts toward relational mentalizing (including mentalizingDepression 231
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Table 9.2 Mental-process and mental-representation approaches to the treatment of depression
Mental-process approach Mental-representation approach
Main aim Improve the process of mentalizing Improve insight
Main
therapeutic
techniquesSpectrum of mentalization-based
techniques, with an emphasis on
fostering basic mentalizingSpectrum of insight-oriented
techniques, with an emphasis on
insight (i.e., the identification and
working through of a repetitive
pattern of self in relation to others
that is related to the onset and
course of mood problems)Table 9.1 The spectrum of severity of depression
Distinguishing
featuresMild to moderate Moderate to severe Severe to very
severe
Nature of
depressive
experiencesMild to moderate
depressed mood and
some somatic
symptoms of
depressionGreater affective
instability, more
profound feelings of
emptiness and diffuse
negative affectivity,
higher levels of self-
criticism and fears of
abandonment, shame,
and self-destructive
behaviorPsychotic symptoms,
such as delusions of
guilt, greater
psychomotor
agitation (excessive
purposeless
movements and
restlessness) or
psychomotor
retardation (slowing
of mental and
physical activities)
Mentalizing
impairmentsTypically mild;
mentalizing is relatively
easily recovered after it
is lostMore severe
impairments in
mentalizingSevere impairments
in mentalizing
Nature of
attachment
problemsRelatively securely
attached; use of
secondary attachment
strategies is often in
response to stress and
mood problemsOver-reliance on
secondary attachment
strategies is typically
present before the
onset of depression
and is exacerbated by
depressed mood;
disorganization of the
attachment system
may be presentDisorganization of
the attachment
system
Impairments in
epistemic trustImpairments are often
secondary to
depressed moodMore severe problems
with epistemic trustSevere problems
with epistemic trust232 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
about the therapeutic relationship), and thus to mentalizing about the relationships
between the patient ’s representations of self and others and their depressive symptoms,
typical of the mental-representation focus. Likewise, even with less severe depression, a
mentalizing focus is typically required, particularly in the early stages of treatment, as
depressed mood is associated with non-mentalizing modes of experiencing the self and
others. For instance, depressed mood often gives rise to psychic equivalence (see
Chapter 2 ) in which the patient feels beyond help. However, the difference in emphasis
is important when considering the focus and aims of treatment.
This chapter will first provide an outline of the mentalizing approach to depression. It will
focus on three key adaptations of the MBT approach to tailor it to the treatment of
depression, based on our evolving understanding of depressive states of mind (see Table 9.3 ):
/C15the importance of supportive, validating, and normalizing interventions to counter
the impact of depressed states of mind on mentalizing; these states of mind may
hinder not only mentalizing but also engagement in the therapeutic process
/C15the MBT clinician ’s capacity to move flexibly along the spectrum from interventions
aimed at fostering the process of mentalizing to interventions that focus on
increasing insight into repetitive interpersonal patterns (advanced relational
mentalizing), tailored to the patient ’s attachment style and associated specific
mentalizing impairments
/C15the role of interventions aimed at increasing embodied mentalizing in depressed
patients, as most if not all of these patients have problems in this area.
This chapter will end with a brief description of the spectrum of mentalizing
approaches, which will also illustrate how to tailor MBT to the needs and capacities of
depressed patients.
The Mentalizing Approach to Depression
Mood and Mentalizing
From a mentalizing perspective, depression is an evolutionarily determined response to
threats to attachment relationships and thus threats to the self (e.g., separation, rejection,
loss, failure), which impairs and distorts mentalizing [ 8,13]. This results in a vicious cycleTable 9.3 Major adaptations of the MBT model for the treatment of patients with depression
Adaptations of the MBT approach Implications for intervention
Address mentalizing impairments
typical of depressed states of mindSupportive interventions, and validation and
normalizing interventions in particular, are important
to counter depressive pessimism that may hinder the
patient ’s engagement in the therapeutic process
Tailor treatment to the patient ’s use
of secondary attachment styles and
associated mentalizing impairmentsThe clinician moves flexibly along the spectrum of
interventions, placing greater emphasis on relational
mentalizing in patients with higher-level functioning
Address problems with embodied
mentalizingUse of interventions that foster embodied mentalizingDepression 233
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
as depressed mood further increases stress and arousal, leading to further impairments
and distortions in mentalizing (i.e., psychic equivalence, teleological, and pretend-mode
functioning, which are described in Chapter 2 ), resulting in a loss of resilience in the face
of stress, thereby increasing vulnerability to depression (see Figure 9.1 ). Individuals with
depression typically do not want to reflect on what is happening to them, and when they
attempt to do so, their mentalizing is likely to be distorted by their depressed mood.
This is why a process focus aimed at restoring the patient ’s mentalizing capacity is
indicated, particularly in the early phases of treatment and in patients with more severe
depression. A more insight-oriented approach is likely to exceed depressed patients ’
ability to mentalize (other than in milder cases), leading to their experiencing more self-
criticism, rumination, helplessness, and even thoughts of suicide. The identification of
the non-mentalizing modes of functioning that are typical of depressed patients is a good
starting point for MBT interventions for depression (see Table 9.4 ).
In depressed patients, psychic equivalence functioning, expressed as a lack of desire
and/or inability to explore their inner mental states, is very common. In psychic
equivalence, thoughts are experienced as reality —the depressed patient isbeyond help,
isworthless, there isno future, and things arewhat they are. In addition, in psychic
equivalence, psychological pain feels like physical pain, and emotional and physical
exhaustion are equated, which in part explains the high comorbidity between depression
and conditions characterized by chronic pain and fatigue [ 14]. This equivalence between
emotions, feelings, and physical states is primarily expressed in impairments in
embodied mentalizing —worries feel like a painful weight on one ’s shoulders, criticism
by others really hurts, depressive thoughts literally “press down on ”the self, and
emotional conflicts seem to “paralyze ”the patient. Hyperembodiment is typical in many
depressed patients, as subjective experiences are experienced as “too real ”and are felt in
terms of bodily experiences. However, as will be discussed in more detail later in thisThreat to
attachment
Depressed
mood
Increase in
arousal•
Loss of
mentalizing
Loss of
resilienceDepressed
mood Fig. 9.1 The relationship
between threats to
attachment, mood,
mentalizing, and resilience in
the face of adversity.234 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
chapter, the patient is often barely aware of the connection between these embodied
states of mind and their presenting problems. Neuroscience studies have shown impair-
ments in neural circuits that are implicated in mentalizing in patients with depression,
including the medial prefrontal cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, and ventromedial parts
of the basal ganglia, reflecting an imbalance between cognitive and affective mentalizing
[15–17].
As depressive symptoms reflect responses to threats to attachment relationships, their
interpersonal nature should be kept in mind. For instance, rumination and self-criticism
clearly have an interpersonal function, as a “pull”for attention and help, and thus reflect
attempts to co-regulate arousal and stress. Hence interventions that involve empathic
marked mirroring of feelings of helplessness, hopelessness, or worthlessness can be
particularly helpful in the early stages of treatment, as they may lead to recovery of
patients ’mentalizing by restoring their feelings of agency and selfhood (as well as
fostering epistemic trust; see Chapter 3 ). These “holding ”and“containing ”interventions
signal to the patient that even unbearable emotions can be discussed and reflected upon.
Communicating the tolerability of affect is essential in therapeutic work with depressed
patients, as many of these patients are convinced that they should be able to bear painfulTable 9.4 Individual differences in attachment styles, typical clinical features, and associated
mentalizing profiles
Attachment hyperactivating Attachment deactivating
Associated
personality
dimensionsDependency/sociotropy Self-criticism/autonomy
Experiential mode Affective, figurative, visual Logical, focused on overt
behavior, clear cause –effect
relationships
Cognitive style Simultaneous processing,
synthesis of discrete elements
into a cohesive wholeManifest form, analytic,
detailed
Interpersonal
relatednessSeeks relatedness, harmony; and
fusion; more field dependentInfluenced by internal
disposition instead of social
environment; more field
independent
Stress-regulation
strategies (defensive
style)Recruitment of the support of
othersIsolation, non-interpersonal
regulation
Typical mentalizing
profileHypersensitivity to mental states
of others, imbalance between
cognitive and affective
mentalizing: affect-driven
hypermentalizing accounts
concerning love, rejection, and
enmeshment with attachment
figuresOften shows “mind blindness ”;
imbalance between cognitive
and affective mentalizing:
cognitive hypomentalizing or
hypermentalizing,
disconnection from emotions,
derogation of mental life as
suchDepression 235
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
feelings and/or are ashamed to admit to and talk about them. In this context, psycho-
educational interventions concerning the influence of mood on mentalizing may also be
helpful, just as psychopharmacological treatment, exercise, and restoring sleep and a
healthier lifestyle in general may be helpful in the recovery of mentalizing.
Psychic equivalence functioning may also increase the risk for suicide as an attempt
to silence psychological pain. Again, careful marked mirroring of unbearable feelings of
psychological pain typically leads the patient to open up about opposite feelings —that is,
the wish to live —which decreases the risk of suicide, as such interventions restore the
patient ’s mentalizing and counteract the “tunnel vision ”that is typical of suicidal states
of mind.
Teleological mode functioning in depressed patients is often related to the origins of
depressed states, consistent with the assumption in the mentalizing approach that
depression is interpersonal in nature. For example, patients with depression may make
often frantic attempts to get attachment figures (including their therapist) to show that
they care for or love them. Patients may demand to have longer or more sessions, or ask
their therapist to touch, hug, or caress them. However, some depressed patients who are
functioning in teleological mode may deny any relationship between their depressed
mood and relational issues, or may try to limit the interpersonal origin of their problems
to simplistic cause –effect relationships: “Depression runs in the family, it must be genetic, ”
“I have been abused, I can ’t help it. ”
Extreme pretend mode orhypermentalizing functioning in depressed patients is also
extremely common. This can lead to hypomentalizing –hypermentalizing cycles, which
can confuse the patient and the clinician alike, leaving them both with feelings of
emptiness and helplessness. Hypermentalizing in depressed patients typically takes the
form of elaborate narratives involving the self and others. These narratives may at first
come across as fairly accurate narrative accounts that reflect genuine mentalizing,
particularly in higher-functioning patients. However, a number of features of these
narratives indicate their roots in hypermentalizing.
1. They are typically overly analytical, repetitive, and lengthy in nature, and are
distorted by depressive themes such as self-criticism, guilt, and shame (excessive
rumination).
2. They may be self-serving (e.g., to control or coerce others, or to portray the patient as
the victim of neglectful others), often leading to counter-responsive feelings of
aggression or boredom in the clinician.
3. They have an imbalance between cognition and affect that is characteristic of
hypermentalizing (i.e., they are either overly cognitive in nature or affectively
overwhelming).
4. The patient shows an inability to switch perspectives from self to other or vice versa,
or from cognition to affect, even when the clinician tries to foster this switch by using
contrary moves (see Chapter 4 ).
In this context, it is also important to discuss the nature of depressive realism , which
refers to the fact that depressed patients may look at the world without “rose-tinted
spectacles, ”and thus their perception may be more accurate than that of people who are
not depressed. Although this can sometimes be the case, depressive realism is not always
more “realistic, ”as it may reflect either hypomentalizing or hypermentalizing. Studies
suggest that having a positive bias is normative and conducive to healthy functioning236 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
[18]; the loss of this positive bias seems to be implicated in vulnerability to depression.
Hence there may be a flipside to the capacity for mentalizing and increased self-
awareness and self-consciousness, as they enable self-conscious emotions such as shame
and guilt. Although these emotions serve important adaptive interpersonal functions,
when they are too intense or chronic they may give rise to excessive feelings of depres-
sion and anxiety. In addition, the capacity for self-consciousness also brings the aware-
ness that there may be a difference between one ’s current self-state and one ’s wished-for
self-state [ 19]. Particularly at specific developmental stages and transitions (e.g.,
adolescence, midlife, old age), coming to realize that there is a discrepancy between
one’s wished-for and actual self-states may lead to feelings of despondency, depression,
and even despair. Findings that neural circuits involved in mentalizing undergo major
structural and functional changes at crucial developmental stages (e.g., adolescence, old
age) may further help to explain the increased risk for depression associated with these
developmental stages, particularly as mentalizing capacities are challenged during these
crucial transitional periods. The emergence of sexuality and new forms of aggression in
adolescence provides an important test for the young person ’s mentalizing capacities, as
does the loss of loved ones and health in old age. This may result in either excessive
mentalizing (pretend-mode functioning or hypermentalizing: “What if I had made other
choices in life? ”) or the defensive avoidance of mentalizing (hypomentalizing: “Everything
has been meaningless ”).
The Role of Attachment in the Co-Regulation of Stress in Depression
It is clear that feelings of depression are not intrinsically maladaptive or pathological. As
we mentioned earlier, depression is a response to threats to attachment relationships, and
even severely depressive states of mind should be seen as attempts to minimize the
distress associated with separation and loss, and thus as attempts to (co-)regulate distress
[20–22]. From this perspective, depression can be seen as a reward-depletion disorder as
much as a stress-related disorder —everything seems hopeless and meaningless, nothing
appears to bring joy, pleasure, or satisfaction any more, and the individual enters into a
state of protest [ 23,24].
However, in the situation where others who might have provided care and support to
the depressed person are either no longer available or perceived as unavailable, the
person ’s primary attachment strategy —to attempt to down-regulate distress by finding
relief and support in others —fails. As a result, the individual begins to rely on secondary
attachment strategies. Attachment-hyperactivating strategies are typically used by anx-
iously attached individuals (e.g., those with a preoccupied attachment style), and involve
frantic efforts to find support, love, and relief, often expressed in demanding and
clinging behavior. Attachment-deactivating strategies are typical of avoidant individuals
(e.g., those with fearful-avoidant and dismissive attachment styles), and involve denying
attachment needs and asserting one ’s own autonomy, independence, and strength. Many
patients with depression show an organized attachment style, and thus tend to rely
primarily on attachment-hyperactivating or attachment-deactivating strategies.
However, patients with disorganized attachment show more severe dysfunctions of the
attachment system, typically manifested as marked oscillations between attachment-
hyperactivating and attachment-deactivating strategies. Patients with disorganized
attachment have more pronounced mentalizing impairments and may also have moreDepression 237
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
severe problems with epistemic trust. These assumptions are well supported by research
findings that show marked heterogeneity in the attachment styles of people with depres-
sion [ 19,25], and by evidence for a prospective relationship between attachment insecur-
ity and depression, which suggests that attachment experiences play a causal role in
vulnerability to depression [ 26–28]. Consistent with the assumptions outlined in this
chapter, disorganized attachment is associated with more severe depression than organ-
ized attachment. Attachment disorganization is also more prevalent in depressed indi-
viduals with borderline-level functioning, characterized by more severe depression and
feelings of emptiness, anger, shame, and identity diffusion [ 4,29]. Attachment-
deactivating strategies, in particular dismissive attachment styles, appear to be associated
with greater vulnerability to a hostile/aggressive subtype of depression [ 30].
The role of mentalizing impairments in depression has been well established
[19,31,32]. Similarly, it is known that a subgroup of individuals with depression has
profound difficulties in seeking and accepting help —indicative of high levels of epistemic
mistrust [ 31]. Furthermore, longitudinal studies have shown that individual differences
in attachment styles mediate the relationship between early adversity and later vulner-
ability to depression through their effects on affect regulation, stress responsivity, and
impairments in social problem-solving skills [ 25,33–35]. Four decades of research on
psychodynamic and cognitive –behavioral approaches to depression have provided evi-
dence for prospective relationships between the personality dimensions of dependency/
sociotropy and self-criticism/autonomy (which overlap theoretically and empirically
with attachment anxiety and attachment avoidance, respectively) and vulnerability to
depression [ 36–39] (see Table 9.4 andFigure 9.2 ).
For the MBT clinician, two major clinical findings have emerged from this body of
research in relation to both the mental-representation focus and the mental-process/
mentalizing focus in the treatment of individuals with depression. First, with regard to
the mental-representation focus, studies have shown that both individuals with high
levels of attachment anxiety/dependency/sociotropy and those with high levels of attach-
ment avoidance/self-criticism/autonomy are characterized by distinct dysfunctional
interpersonal transactional cycles or “self-fulfilling prophecies ”[40]. Individuals with
high levels of attachment anxiety may elicit annoyance, resentment, and eventually
rejection and abandonment by others as a result of a clinging relational style that arises
from underlying fears of rejection and abandonment. Individuals who have high levels of
attachment avoidance, meanwhile, may be more aloof and critical of others; this causes
them to be perceived as cold, distant, and unlikable, and others ’reactions to them confirm
their beliefs that others are unavailable and critical of them. Moreover, whereas individuals
with high levels of attachment anxiety are often able to maintain a few positive supportive
relationships with others because of their strong relational orientation, those with
high levels of attachment avoidance are more often isolated and have fewer positive
relationships. These self-fulfilling prophecies also influence the relationship that patients
have with their clinician, so that their initial perceptions and experiences of the clinician
will match their beliefs and expectations (either idealizing their clinician, or perceiving
them as critical and aloof ). This is especially important when focusing on relational
mentalizing, and when mentalizing the therapeutic relationship in particular.
With regard to the mentalizing focus when treating depressed patients, patients who
rely primarily on attachment-deactivating strategies tend to inhibit mentalizing defen-
sively. As a result, teleological mode and psychic equivalence tend to dominate in these238 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
patients. For example, activity and work are used to defensively inhibit painful feelings of
depression, anxiety, and loneliness, and to “prove ”self-worth. As we shall describe in
more detail later in this chapter, these individuals also often show profound impairments
in their capacity for embodied mentalizing, as they seem to be “disconnected ”from their
emotions and their body. Particularly when depressed, many of these patients show a
derogation of mental life as such, leading to “mind blindness ”about the role of internal
mental states. Things are what they are ( “Nobody likes me, I just know ,”reflecting psychic
equivalence), and they only believe in “objective ”causes ( “My depression is the result of
imbalances in my brain chemistry ,”reflecting teleological thinking). There is an imbal-
ance in mentalizing, with an emphasis on cognitive mentalizing and little if any affective
grounding of experiences. Sometimes such cognitive accounts may be misidentified
by the clinician as genuine mentalizing, but their self-serving, highly cognitive nature,
which leads only to increasing feelings of helplessness and hopelessness, helps to identify
them as pseudomentalizing/pretend mode. Extremely dismissive accounts (e.g., denying
that one has a problem) or extremely idealizing accounts of one ’s attachment history
(e.g., “I had a perfectly normal childhood ,”in combination with an inability to provide
examples to support such accounts) are easier to identify as pseudomentalizing/pretend
mode.Integration
Secure 
attachment
Attachment
deactivation
Disintegration
Disorganized
attachmentAttachment
hyperactivation
Dependency/sociotropy Self-criticism/autonomy
Fig. 9.2 The relationship between attachment dimensions and personality features in depressed patients.Depression 239
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Balancing the Intervention to Support Effective Mentalizing
Process and Attachment Strategies
With depressed patients the first task is to foster a mentalizing stance, before addressing
the underlying psychological issues; this entails focusing on mentalizing as a process and
capacity, rather than on content. It is important to focus in the early stages of treatment
on issues that are congruent with the personality functioning of these patients (e.g.,
autonomy, identity, power, guilt, shame, worthlessness), to try to reduce the risk of these
individuals feeling attacked or shamed. Marked mirroring of these experiences typically
opens up the path to exploring more painful feelings of vulnerability and loneliness in
particular. Normalizing and validating interventions are key, but at the same time there
needs to be an emphasis on affect-focused interventions that increase arousal. As
depressed patients characteristically have considerable difficulties with verbalizing their
emotions, the clinician risks entering into a “cognitive mode, ”too, and the arousal level
in sessions can become too low for any effective mentalizing to emerge. Interventions
that are focused on increasing embodied mentalizing may be particularly useful here, as
these help the patient to experience in the here and now the relationship between their
depressed mood and their internal mental states (which will be discussed in more detail
later). On the other hand, although many of these patients are very restricted and
constricted in their capacity for mentalizing, their often marked cognitive abilities may
lead them to enjoy “playing with ideas ”and the kind of exploratory work that results
from increased basic mentalizing skills. This may be a turning point in treatment as it
leads to increased curiosity about the therapeutic process and the clinician ’s mind, and to
more lasting changes in the interaction between the patient and their interpersonal
environment (i.e., opening up to salutogenesis [ 12]; see also Chapter 11 and later in this
chapter).
Patients who rely primarily on attachment-hyperactivating strategies in response to
threats to attachment relationships show a paradoxical pattern of hypersensitivity to the
mental states of others in combination with a tendency to be overwhelmed by fear of
rejection and abandonment on the one hand, and fear of their own aggression and rage
on the other. As a result, these patients tend to have a low threshold for decoupling of
mentalizing, and they may have considerable difficulty in recovering from mentalizing
impairments. Therefore they may want to please the clinician, which can make it difficult
to identify mentalizing lapses. Patients with borderline features may be prone to confusion
with or contagion by others ’mental states [ 41]. Although mentalizing is typically overly
cognitive in depressed patients who rely primarily on attachment-deactivating strategies,
mentalizing in depressed patients who rely on attachment-hyperactivating strategies is
typically strongly affect driven, often leading to hypermentalized accounts of interpersonal
relationships and a defensive decoupling of mentalizing because they are easily overwhelmed
by the emotions linked to these experiences. In psychic equivalence mode, these individuals
interpret even slight signs of separation or rejection as meaning that others are bored or
want to get rid of them. This then leads to teleological functioning, in which the patient
desperately wants to prove their love, or wants the other to provide proof of their love and
care. It can also lead to pretend-mode functioning, in which there are often seemingly
endless ruminative accounts of social interactions characterized by thoughts about perfect
or unrequited love, or attachment narratives marked by enmeshment with attachment
figures (e.g., parents), leading to further self –other confusion. In patients with higher-level240 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
functioning with histrionic features, pretend-mode functioning gives rise to fantasies in
which the self is depicted as the victim of the bad intentions of others. This hypersensitivity
to mental states, and its propensity to lead to psychic equivalence, teleological, and pretend-
mode functioning, is often also present in relation to the clinician. For instance, when the
clinician announces that they will be taking a break for a holiday, the patient feels rejected,
wants to prove that they are worthy of the clinician ’s attention, and cannot stop thinking
about the incident between sessions.
Thus, although these patients typically like to talk about relationships, their hyper-
sensitivity to the mental states of others in combination with their low threshold for the
decoupling of mentalizing means that fostering a better balance between cognitive and
affective features of mentalizing may be difficult, particularly as many of these patients
are convinced that they are good “mind readers ”(“I know people. All of my friends come
to me for advice about their relationships ”). As a result, clinicians may struggle to find an
optimal balance between the activation of the attachment system, which increases
arousal, and the decoupling of mentalizing, particularly with interventions that attempt
to clarify links between symptoms of depression and interpersonal conflict and ambiva-
lence (i.e., a mental-representation focus). Careful marked mirroring of feelings of loss
and separation based on micro-slicing of recent interpersonal events may improve the
patient ’s capacity for basic mentalizing and improve their ability to mentalize more
difficult feelings of aggression, anger, and autonomy. Anxiously attached individuals
typically have difficulty considering these feelings, which they experience as threatening
to their relationships. Mentalizing the therapeutic relationship —that is, identifying the
patient ’s responses to the clinician in the here and now of the therapeutic situation —
plays an important role in fostering relational mentalizing in these individuals, although,
as we mentioned earlier in this chapter (see also Chapter 4 ), this has to wait until stable
mentalizing is better established. Moreover, as treatment progresses, encouraging the
patient to experiment with new ways of relating to others outside the “interpersonal
laboratory ”of the therapy sessions is important, as it provides new opportunities to
examine the re-emergence of non-mentalizing modes of functioning and to monitor
progress in the emergence of more robust mentalizing.
Embodied Mentalizing
Research findings from different theoretical traditions have shown that a significant
proportion of depressed patients have difficulties with several components of embodied
mentalizing, either because of pre-existing problems with embodied mentalizing, or as a
result of their depressed mood, or both [ 42–46]. These problems can be summarized as
follows:
1.problems with recognizing emotions —many depressed patients seem to be unable
to relate bodily experiences to inner mental states ( “I don ’t know what I feel, I feel bad,
tense, that ’si t”), and some patients even argue that they do not feel anything at all
(“I used to feel something, but I no longer seem to have feelings ”)
2.problems recognizing emotions as their own —they are easily “infected ”by others ’
emotions or deny that they feel depressed or sad
3.problems reflecting on and modulating emotions —they are easily overwhelmed by
emotions or are readily triggered to respond in teleological mode, leading to
enactmentsDepression 241
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
4.problems sharing emotions appropriately —depressed patients often believe that it is
a sign of weakness to share their emotions with others, or, conversely, they
immediately begin to talk about their difficult emotions as if they have known their
clinician for many years, often assuming that the clinician is completely familiar with
the details of their life.
When working with depressed patients, it is therefore important for the clinician to
carefully explore, using the not-knowing, inquisitive stance, the relationship between
bodily experiences (so-called somatic markers of emotions) and unmentalized states of
mind. This is also particularly important in patients who present with somatoform
features [ 14].
To achieve this the clinician uses the well-known basic mentalizing techniques of stop
and explore andstop and rewind (seeChapter 4) to micro-slice embodied experiences in
the here and now of the therapeutic situation. A typical sequence of interventions aimed
at promoting embodied mentalizing focuses on recognizing ,amplifying , and differentiat-
ingbetween emotions, linking these emotions to the interpersonal dynamics associated
with the onset and persistence of symptoms, and marking the emotional cost of problems
with embodied mentalizing. This is known as the “RADLE ”sequence (see Table 9.5 ).
Recognizing Emotions
Initially patients often describe only physical sensations linked to their depressive state
(e.g., “I always feel tense, ”“I feel so tired ”). This points to unmentalized emotions, and so
the first task is to recognize such apparently undifferentiated bodily experiences asTable 9.5 Interventions aimed at increasing embodied mentalizing: the RADLE sequence
Intervention Method
Recognizing emotions Focus on physical sensations (somatic markers
of emotions) and explore their emotional
context, using the not-knowing, inquisitive
stance to generate possible hypotheses about
underlying emotional states, which are shared
with the patient in order to arrive at a joint
understanding
Amplifying emotions Amplify the emotional experience: “So you felt
anxious ”
Differentiating emotions Explore the different emotional experiences one
at a time; amplify and explore the causal
relationships between them
Linking of emotions to the patient ’s typical
patterns of feeling and thinkingIf possible and appropriate, link emotions to the
patient ’s prototypical ways of feeling, thinking,
and relating
Marking the Emotional (and often physical)
cost of problems with embodied
mentalizingValidate and normalize problems with
embodied mentalizing as understandable
responses to stress, but also discuss the high
emotional (and often physical) cost associated
with these problems242 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
emotions. The clinician must often use their own mind to generate hypotheses about
these unmentalized bodily experiences, and test these against the patient ’s experience.
For example, a patient relates how he got into an argument with his wife and then “shut
down. ”When the clinician asks how the patient felt during the argument, he responds:
“I don ’t know, nothing, I think ,”but he clearly feels tense, begins to blush, and clenches
his hands. In response, the clinician says that he can ’t imagine that the patient felt
nothing at all, and adds: “When you just said you didn ’t feel anything, I saw you become
all tense over your body; you turned your face away from me, began to blush, and clenched
your hands tightly together. Do you feel anxious or ashamed? ”Again, the not-knowing
stance implies humility and the clinician must model misunderstanding: “Ah, you didn ’t
feel anxious, I am glad you corrected me. So you felt angry and then ashamed .”
Amplifying Emotions
Because the patient is usually largely unaware of these unmentalized bodily experiences,
the clinician needs to amplify the underlying emotions one by one, using marked
mirroring: “Ah, so you felt anger in the first place. How did that feel? ”
Differentiating Emotions
Unmentalized bodily experiences typically involve several emotions that are also causally
related. In the example that has just been described, in addition to anger the patient felt
ashamed and anxious as a result of his anger. Therefore the clinician actively explores
each of these feelings together with the patient, identifies them, and attempts to arrive at
a coherent narrative that ties all of these feelings together.
Linking Emotions
The next step in the sequence entails linking emotions to prototypical ways of relating to
the self and others and their connection with presenting symptoms. Micro-slicing of
previously unmentalized bodily experiences leads the patient to experience, in the here
and now of the session, the relationship between typical patterns of thinking and feeling
and their presenting symptoms. This process plays an important role in fostering
mentalizing in the patient and allowing them to increasingly make these links in their
everyday life.
Emotional Cost
Finally, a focus on improving embodied mentalizing includes the clinician highlighting
the emotional cost of problems with (embodied) mentalizing. For instance, to continue
with the clinical example outlined earlier, the clinician may link the patient ’s various
problems with embodied mentalizing to their depressive symptoms: “If I am correct, we
have seen how, when someone criticizes you, you tend to respond with anger, quickly
followed by anxiety and shame because of your feelings of anger, followed by you ‘shutting
yourself down, ’leaving you feeling empty and drained. Is that about right? ”If the patient
recognizes this sequence as typical of their way of responding, the clinician could then go
on to add: “However understandable this response may be, it also has clear disadvantages,
as you do not seem to be aware of what is happening to you in such circumstances and you
are left with a lot of feelings that you can ’t seem to digest .”
In this way the patient is able to shift from experiencing the self in terms of a physical
self to experiencing it in terms of a psychological self , developing second-orderDepression 243
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
representations of the self and mentalized affectivity —the capacity to reflect and modu-
late embodied emotional experiences.
Epistemic Trust
A mental-representation focus relies heavily on mentalizing capacities that a consider-
able subgroup of patients who present with depression does not possess. Using this focus
too early in treatment, before the patient has strengthened their capacity to mentalize, is
therefore likely to be associated with iatrogenic effects. In these patients, mentalizing
capacities are easily lost, leading to increasing pressure to externalize non-mentalized
aspects of the self (e.g., aspects related to traumatic experiences), and this can trigger the
emergence of the alien self (see Chapter 2 ). These patients also often show pronounced
epistemic mistrust, either related to their attachment history or resulting from unhelpful
treatments in the past, or a combination of both. Insight-oriented interventions (in
particular, brief insight-oriented interventions) for depression which assume that the
patient has sufficient mentalizing capacities and epistemic trust to establish a working
alliance are not indicated for such patients (see Tables 9.1 and9.2).
A mental-process focus is more appropriate for these patients. Particularly when working
with individuals with high levels of epistemic mistrust, marked mirroring of often profound
feelings of depression and despair is needed to restore (or, in the most severely affected
patients, to develop) epistemic trust. In line with our hypothesis that effective treatments rely
on three communication systems [ 12,47]( s e ea l s o Chapter 2 ), the clinician first needs to
communicate to the patient in an empathic and supportive way that the clinician ’s mind is
available and is able to tolerate, contain, and reflect upon mental states that the patient finds
unbearable, through careful and progressive marked mirroring of such mental states in the
here and now (communication system 1). Only when the patient feels truly understood will
their epistemic vigilance be relaxed, and at the same time their sense of agency and selfhood
will be restored, leading to more robust mentalizing capacities and an increased curiosity
about the mind of the clinician. In the majority of cases this is a slow and painstaking process
characterized by trial and error, and it is imperative that the clinician models humility,
imperfection, and misunderstanding as inevita ble features of human communication, while
at the same time unwaveringly modeling the not-knowing, inquisitive stance. The not-
knowing stance is particularly important because many of these patients will have encoun-
tered others in their environment, including health professionals, who “knew ”what was
wrong with them and provided them with advice that they did not feel was helpful.
If all goes well with this early stage of treatment, the marked mirroring of unbearable
experiences gives rise to a sense of “we-ness ”in the treatment, and an increase in the
patient ’s mentalizing capacities (communication system 2). If the patient ’s mentalizing
capacities are robust enough at this stage, a mental-representation focus might now be
indicated. However, many of these patients will continue to struggle with a mental-
representation focus, particularly those with marked borderline or psychotic symptoms.
Next, the patient needs to be actively supported to increasingly create and open up to a
more benign social environment (the basis of communication system 3).
The Spectrum of Mentalization-Based Interventions
This section will briefly summarize some aspects of MBT that are pertinent to the
treatment of depression, and the basic principles of DIT [ 8], a brief manualized244 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
treatment for depression that combines a mentalizing (i.e., mental-process) and a
mental-representation focus, which has been shown to be effective in the treatment of
mild to moderate depression [ 9]. In patients with more marked personality disorder
symptoms this approach might be iatrogenic, particularly if it is used as a first-line
treatment, because these patients often have severe impairments in mentalizing and
profound epistemic mistrust [ 6,7]. For these patients, development of a trusting and
collaborative relationship as a basis for treatment is needed first —something that is taken
for granted in many models of treatment for depression. For work with these patients, an
extended version of the DIT model for patients with more complex problems, DITCC
[11], or MBT for personality disorder (as outlined in Chapter 4 ) seem to be more
appropriate [ 12]. There is research evidence for the effectiveness of MBT in the treatment
of depression, including self-harm and suicidality, in both adults [ 48,49] and adolescents
[50,51] with personality disorders. MBT for psychosis (see Chapter 10 ) may be considered
as an option for depressed patients with psychotic symptoms, although at the time of
writing no studies have investigated the effectiveness of MBT in these patients. Similarly,
the effectiveness of MBT in patients with bipolar disorder awaits investigation.
Mentalization-Based Treatment for Patients with Moderate to
Severe Depression
The MBT approach to depression is based on the view, common to all types of MBT, that
vulnerability to a loss of mentalizing in combination with epistemic mistrust charac-
terizes severe forms of psychopathology, including depressive states of mind. In patients
at the more severe end of the spectrum of depression there is therefore a focus on
improving mentalizing in the context of an enduring attachment relationship with the
clinician. For these patients, a focus on “insight, ”particularly concerning the potential
relationship between events in the past and current functioning, is typically unhelpful
and often even harmful. In MBT for depression the focus is therefore on improving the
patient ’s reflective functioning with regard to their current mental states, while avoiding
the emergence of non-mentalizing models of experiencing subjectivity, which readily
emerge in patients with severe depression, as we outlined earlier in this chapter. Thus the
MBT approach de-emphasizes “deep ”interpretations in favor of a focus on near-
conscious experiences in the here and now or the recent past, with an emphasis on
emotional and relational experiencing (the affect focus) (e.g., “Your wife called you just
before the session; how did that make you feel? ”). This approach also includes the
avoidance of extensive discussions of past events, in particular traumatic events, except
when these discussions are helpful for understanding the patient ’s current mental states.
Instead, MBT for depression aims at the recovery of mentalizing ( “I can see that she hurt
you, but can we pause and talk about what just happened between the two of you? ”).
The key task of the MBT clinician is therefore —using the not-knowing, inquisitive
stance —to promote curiosity in the patient about their mental states, even in depressed
states of mind. This leads the clinician and the patient to jointly realize that there is
meaning and coherence where no meaning or coherence is felt or expected. This leads to
the restoration of feelings of agency, autonomy, and self-coherence in the patient, and,
because the patient feels mirrored in a marked way by the clinician ( “Here is someone
who does not run away from the awful feelings and who seems to understand me ”),
increasing epistemic trust and the (re-)emergence of mentalizing (leading to changesDepression 245
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
in communication systems 1 and 2). By “staying with the patient ”even when the patient
feels completely helpless or hopeless, the clinician communicates concern, agency, and
the tolerability of affect, however difficult it may be. It is important to realize that this
inquisitive yet not-knowing stance is exactly the opposite of the psychic equivalence that
is typical of the depressed patient ’s state of mind, as psychic equivalence is characterized
by either a lack of curiosity about mental states (hypomentalizing) or excessive certainty
about the mental states of the self and others. Pseudomentalizing/pretend mode and
other “fillers ”that reflect non-mentalizing need to be explored in depressed patients,
along with the lack of practical success that comes with using these modes ( “Well, I can
now see that you seem to have the feeling that you are beyond help, but this feeling is not
really helping you, me, and us today, as you yourself just said that this feeling is so
discouraging that you can hardly think or feel any more ”).
The typical starting point for MBT interventions with depressed patients, as in MBT
more generally, therefore entails the following sequence.
1. Interventions typically start when the clinician identifies a break in mentalizing (i.e.,
psychic equivalence, pretend mode, or teleological mode of thought) as a result of the
patient ’s depressed mood ( “This is useless, I cannot see where this is leading us ”).
2. The patient and the clinician then “rewind ”to the moment before the break in
mentalizing, with the clinician opening up the possibility that they contributed to this
lapse in mentalizing ( “What happened so that you feel like that —is it related to
something that I said? ”).
3. The clinician and the patient then explore the current emotion, with a focus on
identifying the momentary affective state between patient and clinician (affect focus)
(“We were talking about your wife, and then I asked you how you felt when she called
you, and then you became very sad and extremely self-critical —is that what
happened? ”).
4. The potential contribution of the clinician to the lapse in mentalizing is identified
and acknowledged ( “Oh, I see, you were so hurt when she called you, and then you had
to talk about these feelings ”).
5. If possible and appropriate, the clinician and patient then try to understand the
mental states implicit in the current state of the patient –clinician relationship (i.e., to
mentalize the therapeutic relationship) ( “And then I asked you how it made you feel,
which just increased your feelings of sadness and worthlessness —is that what
happened? Oh, I understand now, and I must confess I started to feel sad and helpless
as well ”).
When treating depressed patients, it is also crucially important for the clinician to
adopt the following principles.
/C15Model humility, consistent with the not-knowing stance ( “Well, I am glad you told
me, because I didn ’t realize how much she hurt you the other day. I thought she made
you angry, so you see how important it is that you tell me what you are feeling, and
how easily I can misunderstand you ”).
/C15Continue to identify differences in perspectives, particularly as depressed states of
mind may easily lead to self –other confusion and thus similar feelings in the patient
and the clinician ( “Well, you may feel that life is meaningless, but I tend to differ, as
I can see that you do enjoy certain aspects of life, like playing with your
grandchildren ”).246 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
/C15Continue active questioning, asking for detailed descriptions of experience ( “what ”
questions) rather than explanations ( “why”questions) ( “So, what did you feel when
she didn ’t turn up? ”).
/C15Avoid the need to understand everything that the patient relates; this is particularly
important when the patient is functioning in pretend mode. When this happens, the
clinician should stop and rewind to a point when the patient ’s mentalizing was
stronger ( “Sorry, but you lost me there, can we return to what you said earlier? ”).
Thus, in work with depressed patients, it is imperative for the clinician to be aware
that they are constantly at risk of losing their capacity to mentalize when faced with the
patient ’s depressed states of mind. Loss of mentalizing in this context is typically experi-
enced by the clinician as experiences of “running round in circles ”or“being sucked into
a black hole. ”This may lead to psychic equivalence functioning in the clinician ( “Ia m
lost, this patient is beyond help, I no longer know what to do or say ”) or teleological mode,
in which the clinician may intervene in a concrete way (e.g., by having the patient
hospitalized). Of course, such lapses of mentalizing are inevitable in the treatment of
depressed patients, and require the clinician and the patient to jointly explore the
(interpersonal) experiences that lead up to such events.
Finally, in the case of severely depressed patients, both pre-existing personality-
related vulnerability and a history of depression may have left significant “scars ”on
their interpersonal environment. More often than not, severely depressed patients have
become socially isolated or are entangled in long-lasting interpersonal conflicts. Hence,
in MBT for depression, there is a strong emphasis on helping these patients to experi-
ment with new ways of relating to the self and others, and fostering the capacity for
salutogenesis (communication system 3). Particularly in patients with substantial per-
sonality problems, a broader systemic approach —for example, involving the patient ’sG P
and, where appropriate, social services —is indicated to help the individual to bring about
the necessary changes in their social environment.
Dynamic Interpersonal Therapy for Depression
DIT is an integrative treatment that incorporates mental representation and mentalizing
approaches [ 8,52]. It thus combines treatment principles and interventions that are
central to MBT with a mental-representation focus, in that an interpersonal affective
focus (IPAF) is formulated jointly with the patient in the initial sessions and is then used
as the focus of the treatment. The IPAF can be seen as an extension of the traditional case
formulation in MBT (described in Chapter 4 ). The difference is that in DIT the focus is
much more on the content of the case formulation in the treatment, whereas in MBT the
focus is on the mental processes that generate the content. DIT thus also incorporates
more traditional psychodynamic insight-oriented or expressive techniques to develop the
IPAF in interaction with the patient, and to work through it during treatment. However,
the mentalizing focus, together with more directive interventions that foster change in
patients, allows tailoring of the treatment to the individual patient ’s needs and capacities.
As in MBT, transference interpretations ( “mentalizing the therapeutic relationship ”) are
de-emphasized and are mainly used to clarify the IPAF in the here and now, particularly
in patients with strong relational sensitivity, in order to prevent premature ending of the
treatment by the patient. This view is based on studies that have shown a negative
relationship between a high frequency of transference interpretations and both theDepression 247
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
therapeutic relationship and the outcome of treatment, even in patients with high levels
of functioning [ 53,54]. Similarly, the main focus in DIT is on the patient ’s current
(interpersonal) functioning as it relates to their depressive symptoms, and DIT therefore
has less of a focus on past experiences compared with traditional psychodynamic
approaches (although past experiences are, of course, explored in relation to the patient ’s
current functioning).
The original DIT model is a 16-session time-limited intervention. Subsequently,
DITCC, an extended 28-session model consisting of 20 weekly sessions followed by six
fortnightly sessions and two monthly follow-ups, was developed, with a greater focus on
addressing problems with epistemic trust and mentalizing in patients with more marked
personality problems.
The original DIT model consists of three phases (initial, middle, and ending), each
with its own specific aims and therapeutic strategies. The primary task of the initial phase
(sessions 1 –4) is to identify and jointly formulate with the patient the IPAF, a core
recurring unconscious interpersonal pattern (or attachment style) related to the onset
and/or maintenance of the patient ’s depressive symptoms. This pattern consists of four
components, which show the roots of the DIT model in mental-representation
approaches: (a) a particular representation of self (e.g., “I am worthless ”); (b) a typical
representation of others ( “Others always criticize me ”) that characterizes the patient ’s
typical interpersonal style and is linked to the onset of depressive symptoms; (c)
particular affect(s) linked to these self-in-relation-to-other representations (e.g., depres-
sion, sadness, and anxiety); and (d) the defensive constellation of the IPAF (e.g., to
defend against underlying feelings of aggression). In treatment, this repetitive pattern, its
relationship to depressive symptoms, and its high (interpersonal) costs are explored. As
the patient develops increased insight and greater mentalizing capacities, they are then
encouraged to explore and experiment with new ways of relating to others, which leads
them to relinquish their “old”pattern. This typically occurs in the middle phase of DIT,
which involves maintaining a focus on the agreed IPAF and helping the patient to
identify the interpersonal “costs ”of the IPAF (mental-representation focus), while also
fostering the patient ’s capacity to reflect on thoughts and feelings (the mentalizing
focus). When the patient and clinician struggle to formulate an IPAF, or when the
patient seems to have two opposite IPAFs (e.g., the patient is the victim of others, but at
the same time also appears to be hypercritical of others), it is likely that the patient has a
disorganized attachment style. In this case, DIT is not indicated, as neither the patient
nor the clinician can be sure what exactly they are trying to address from a mental-
representation perspective, particularly as the patient may lack the mentalizing capacity
to reflect on the two opposing patterns and their interrelationship. Again this emphasizes
the importance of the distinction between a mental-representation and a mental-process
focus.
The final phase in DIT is devoted to empowering the patient to consolidate changes
and, consistent with the focus on change in communication system 3, to foster their
capacity for salutogenesis. This is initiated by the clinician writing the patient a “goodbye
letter, ”which sets out the initial agreed formulation, the progress that has been made
during treatment, and the work that remains to be done in the ending phase and after the
treatment has finished. Again, extreme responses from the patient toward the end of
treatment may be indicative of more severe underlying problems, as the approaching end
of treatment may generate strong anxieties about abandonment or feelings of aggression248 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
in them. Therefore the ending phase plays an important role in gauging therapeutic
progress. For this reason, this phase is extended in DITCC to enable the patient to
experiment with new ways of relating to the self and others, while at the same time
having a “safe haven ”in which to work through potential problems with the ending of
the treatment.
Concluding Remarks
The mentalizing approach to the conceptualization and treatment of depression starts
from the assumption that symptoms of depression arise from reactions to threats to
attachment relationships —and thus threats to the self —and associated impairments in
mentalizing that may be present before the onset of depressive symptoms and/or are
exacerbated by depressed mood. Based on these assumptions, depressed patients can be
viewed as being on a spectrum of severity based on differences in the nature of their
depressive experiences, their typical mentalizing impairments, their dominant attach-
ment styles, and the nature of their impairments in epistemic trust. This chapter has
summarized the basic principles of a range of mentalization-based approaches to the
treatment of depression and how those principles can be tailored to the individual
patient, depending on their position on the spectrum of severity as defined by their
mentalizing capacities.
References
1. Cuijpers P, Stringaris A, Wolpert M.
Treatment outcomes for depression:
challenges and opportunities. Lancet
Psychiatry 2020; 7: 925 –27.
2. Cuijpers P, Karyotaki E, de Wit L, Ebert
DD. The effects of fifteen evidence-
supported therapies for adult depression:
a meta-analytic review. Psychother Res
2020; 30: 279 –93.
3. Rost F, Luyten P, Fearon P, Fonagy P.
Personality and outcome in individuals
with treatment-resistant depression:
exploring differential treatment effects in
the Tavistock Adult Depression Study
(TADS). J Consult Clin Psychol 2019; 87:
433–45.
4. Luyten P, Fonagy P. Psychodynamic
treatment for borderline personality
disorder and mood disorders: a
mentalizing perspective. In: Choi-Kain L,
Gunderson J, eds. Borderline Personality
Disorder and Mood Disorders:
Controversies and Consensus . New York,
NY: Springer, 2014; 223 –51.
5. Cuijpers P, van Straten A, Bohlmeijer E
et al. The effects of psychotherapy foradult depression are overestimated: a
meta-analysis of study quality and effect
size. Psychol Med 2010; 40: 211 –23.
6. Fonagy P, Edgcumbe R, Moran GS et al.
The roles of mental representations and
mental processes in therapeutic action.
Psychoanal Study Child 1993; 48:9–48.
7. Luyten P, Blatt SJ, Fonagy P. Impairments
in self structures in depression and
suicide in psychodynamic and cognitive
behavioral approaches: implications for
clinical practice and research. Int J Cogn
Ther 2013; 6: 265 –79.
8. Lemma A, Target M, Fonagy P. Brief
Dynamic Interpersonal Therapy:
A Clinician ’s Guide . Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 2011.
9. Fonagy P, Lemma A, Target M et al.
Dynamic interpersonal therapy for
moderate to severe depression: a pilot
randomized controlled and feasibility
trial. Psychol Med 2020; 50: 1010 –19.
10. Gunderson JG, Morey LC, Stout RL et al.
Major depressive disorder and borderline
personality disorder revisited:
longitudinal interactions. J Clin
Psychiatry 2004; 65: 1049 –56.Depression 249
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
11. Rao AS, Lemma A, Fonagy P et al.
Development of dynamic interpersonal
therapy in complex care (DITCC): a pilot
study. Psychoanal Psychother 2019; 33:
77–98.
12. Luyten P, Campbell C, Allison E, Fonagy
P. The mentalizing approach to
psychopathology: state of the art and
future directions. Annu Rev Clin Psychol
2020; 16: 297 –325.
13. Luyten P, Fonagy P. An integrative
developmental psychopathology
approach to depression. In: Jiménez JP,
Botto A, Fonagy P, eds. Etiopathogenic
Theories and Models in Depression .
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022;
245–63.
14. Luyten P, Fonagy P. Psychodynamic
psychotherapy for patients with
functional somatic disorders and the road
to recovery. Am J Psychother 2020; 73:
125–30.
15. Drevets WC, Price JL, Furey ML. Brain
structural and functional abnormalities in
mood disorders: implications for
neurocircuitry models of depression.
Brain Struct Funct 2008; 213:9 3–118.
16. Savitz J, Drevets WC. Bipolar and major
depressive disorder: neuroimaging the
developmental-degenerative divide.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2009; 33: 699 –771.
17. Johnson MK, Nolen-Hoeksema S,
Mitchell KJ, Levin Y. Medial cortex
activity, self-reflection and depression.
Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2009; 4: 313 –27.
18. Moore MT, Fresco DM. Depressive
realism: a meta-analytic review. Clin
Psychol Rev 2012; 32: 496 –509.
19. Luyten P, Fonagy P, Lemma A, Target M.
Depression. In: Bateman A, Fonagy P,
eds.Handbook of Mentalizing in Mental
Health Practice . Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.,
2012; 385 –417.
20. Panksepp J, Watt D. Why does depression
hurt? Ancestral primary-process
separation-distress (PANIC/GRIEF) and
diminished brain reward (SEEKING)
processes in the genesis of depressive
affect. Psychiatry 2011; 74:5–13.21. Gilbert P. Evolution and depression:
issues and implications. Psychol Med
2006; 36: 287 –97.
22. Davey CG, Yucel M, Allen NB. The
emergence of depression in adolescence:
development of the prefrontal cortex and
the representation of reward. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 2008; 32:1–19.
23. Bowlby J. Attachment and Loss:
Separation . New York, NY: Basic Books,
1973.
24. Spitz RA. Hospitalism: an inquiry into the
genesis of psychiatric conditions in early
childhood. Psychoanal Study Child 1945;
1:5 3–74.
25. Brown GW, Harris TO, Craig TKJ.
Exploration of the influence of insecure
attachment and parental maltreatment on
the incidence and course of adult clinical
depression. Psychol Med 2019; 49:
1025 –32.
26. Dagan O, Facompre CR, Bernard K.
Adult attachment representations and
depressive symptoms: a meta-analysis.
J Affect Disord 2018; 236: 274 –90.
27. Spruit A, Goos L, Weenink N et al. The
relation between attachment and
depression in children and adolescents: a
multilevel meta-analysis. Clin Child Fam
Psychol Rev 2020; 23:5 4–69.
28. Khan F, Fraley RC, Young JF, Hankin BL.
Developmental trajectories of attachment
and depressive symptoms in children and
adolescents. Attach Hum Dev 2020; 22:
392–408.
29. Lecompte V, Moss E, Cyr C, Pascuzzo K.
Preschool attachment, self-esteem and the
development of preadolescent anxiety and
depressive symptoms. Attach Hum Dev
2014; 16: 242 –60.
30. MacGregor EK, Grunebaum MF, Galfalvy
HC et al. Depressed parents ’attachment:
effects on offspring suicidal behavior in a
longitudinal family study. J Clin
Psychiatry 2014; 75: 879 –85.
31. Luyten P, Fonagy P. The stress –reward –
mentalizing model of depression: an
integrative developmental cascade
approach to child and adolescent
depressive disorder based on the Research250 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Domain Criteria (RDoC) approach. Clin
Psychol Rev 2018; 64:8 7–98.
32. Fischer-Kern M, Tmej A. Mentalization
and depression: theoretical concepts,
treatment approaches and empirical
studies –an overview. Z Psychosom Med
Psychother 2019; 65: 162 –77.
33. Bifulco A, Kwon J, Jacobs C et al. Adult
attachment style as mediator between
childhood neglect/abuse and adult
depression and anxiety. Soc Psychiatry
Psychiatr Epidemiol 2006; 41: 796 –805.
34. Styron T, Janoff-Bulman R. Childhood
attachment and abuse: long-term effects
on adult attachment, depression, and
conflict resolution. Child Abuse Negl
1997; 21: 1015 –23.
35. Widom CS, Czaja SJ, Kozakowski SS,
Chauhan P. Does adult attachment style
mediate the relationship between
childhood maltreatment and mental and
physical health outcomes? Child Abuse
Negl 2018; 76: 533 –45.
36. Blatt SJ. Experiences of Depression:
Theoretical, Clinical, and Research
Perspectives . Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association, 2004.
37. Beck AT. Cognitive therapy of
depression: new perspectives. In: Clayton
PJ, Barrett JE, eds. Treatment of
Depression: Old Controversies and New
Approaches . New York, NY: Raven Press,
1983; 265 –90.
38. Blatt SJ, Luyten P. A structural-
developmental psychodynamic approach
to psychopathology: two polarities of
experience across the life span. Dev
Psychopathol 2009; 21: 793 –814.
39. Luyten P, Blatt SJ. Interpersonal
relatedness and self-definition in normal
and disrupted personality development:
retrospect and prospect. Am Psychol 2013;
68: 172 –83.
40. Luyten P, Blatt SJ, Van Houdenhove B,
Corveleyn J. Depression research and
treatment: are we skating to where the
puck is going to be? Clin Psychol Rev
2006; 26: 985 –99.
41. Fonagy P, Luyten P. A developmental,
mentalization-based approach to theunderstanding and treatment of
borderline personality disorder. Dev
Psychopathol 2009; 21: 1355 –81.
42. Jurist EL. Mentalized affectivity.
Psychoanal Psychol 2005; 22: 426 –44.
43. Lane RD, Quinlan DM, Schwartz GE,
Walker PA. The Levels of Emotional
Awareness Scale: a cognitive-
developmental measure of emotion. J Pers
Assess 1990; 55: 124 –34.
44. Taylor GJ, Bagby RM. Psychoanalysis and
empirical research: the example of
alexithymia. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 2013;
61:9 9–133.
45. Lumley MA, Schubiner H, Lockhart NA
et al. Emotional awareness and expression
therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, and
education for fibromyalgia: a cluster-
randomized controlled trial. Pain 2017;
158: 2354 –63.
46. Luyten P, De Meulemeester C, Fonagy P.
Psychodynamic therapy in patients with
somatic symptom disorder. In: Kealy D,
Ogrodniczuk JS, eds. Contemporary
Psychodynamic Psychotherapy: Evolving
Clinical Practice . Philadelphia, PA:
Academic Press, 2019; 191 –206.
47. Bateman A, Campbell C, Luyten P,
Fonagy P. A mentalization-based
approach to common factors in the
treatment of borderline personality
disorder. Curr Opin Psychol 2018; 21:
44–9.
48. Bateman A, Fonagy P. 8-year follow-up of
patients treated for borderline personality
disorder: mentalization-based treatment
versus treatment as usual. Am J Psychiatry
2008; 165: 631 –8.
49. Smits ML, Feenstra DJ, Bales DL et al.
Day hospital versus intensive outpatient
mentalization-based treatment: 3-year
follow-up of patients treated for
borderline personality disorder in a
multicentre randomized clinical trial.
Psychol Med 2022; 52: 485 –95.
50. Rossouw TI, Fonagy P. Mentalization-
based treatment for self-harm in
adolescents: a randomized controlled
trial. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
2012; 51: 1304 –13.Depression 251
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
51. Feenstra DJ, Hutsebaut J, Laurenssen EM
et al. The burden of disease among
adolescents with personality pathology:
quality of life and costs. J Personal Disord
2012; 26: 593 –604.
52. Lemma A, Target M, Fonagy P. The
development of a brief psychodynamic
protocol for depression: Dynamic
Interpersonal Therapy (DIT). Psychoanal
Psychother 2010; 24: 329 –46.53. Høglend P. Analysis of transference in
psychodynamic psychotherapy: a review
of empirical research. Can J Psychoanal
2004; 12: 279 –300.
54. Høglend P, Bøgwald K-P, Amlo S et al.
Transference interpretations in dynamic
psychotherapy: do they really yield
sustained effects? Am J Psychiatry 2008;
165: 763 –71.252 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 400 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part III
Chapter
10Application and Adaptations for Mental Health
Presentations
Psychosis
Introduction
During the past 15 years, clinicians have attempted to employ the clinical framework of
mentalization-based treatment (MBT) to inform the psychotherapeutic treatment of
patients with schizophrenia-spectrum disorders and other psychosis disorders*[1–5].
Clinicians in a number of different countries have tailored their methods to include
elements of MBT, and have proposed different ways to provide their patients with MBT-
informed therapy for psychosis [ 5–7]. These pioneering strides have been extremely
useful in:
1. providing preliminary evidence of the feasibility and acceptability of MBT-informed
therapy in patients with psychosis
2. identifying the needs of this patient population, specifically with regard to their
clinical profiles and severity of illness
3. promoting the creativity of MBT-trained clinicians in their attempts to alleviate the
suffering and alienation that individuals with psychosis experience.
Along with conceptual developments [ 8,9], these clinical developments have contrib-
uted to identifying the core components of the MBT approach to psychosis. To date,
however, a comprehensive framework outlining the core components of the MBT
approach to psychosis has been only partially proposed [ 10,11]. In this chapter we shall
attempt to collate the available empirical and clinical knowledge gained from early
adaptations of MBT for psychosis, and articulate them with recent developments in
the core MBT model (see Chapter 4 ). The overarching aim of this chapter is to present
and illustrate the core principles of application of the MBT model to psychotic disorders.
The MBT Clinical Approach to Psychosis
Not unlike other adaptations of MBT to various clinical presentations of psychopath-
ology, the MBT approach to psychotic disorders considers the age and history of the
individual in relation to the onset of their psychological problems, and requires an
assessment of the severity of the disorder in terms of both a staging approach [ 12] and
the severity of its functional impact [ 10]. Both of these domains will influence the
structure and aims of treatment, which are discussed in more detail in the next section.
In keeping with MBT ’s developmental approach, and in line with contemporary
clinical research on the schizophrenia spectrum [ 13], psychotic disorders are understood
*This chapter will use the terms “psychosis ”and “psychotic disorders ”interchangeably to refer to
the DSM-V category Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders [ 1].
253
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
as (neuro)developmental disorders. Importantly, the etiology of psychotic disorders
most probably builds on a strong and significant genetic basis [ 14]. This does not mean
that early environmental adversity does not come into play —on the contrary, many
developmental studies are uncovering what Paul E. Meehl referred to as interactions
between psychosocial stress and polygenetic potentiators [ 15,16]. There are at least five
neurobiological routes by which early adversity, developmental trauma, and attachment
insecurity may each contribute to increase the risk for onset of a psychotic disorder (for a
review, see Debbané et al. [ 9]). Therefore a careful history of the patient ’s relationship
patterns, stressful life events, and developmental trauma, as is required in the initial/
formulation phase of MBT, assists in framing the context in which psychosis has
emerged (see later in this chapter) and how it has affected different functional areas in
the individual ’s life.
From a clinical standpoint, such a developmental model informing MBT requires
three main clinical actions:
1. assessing the developmental stage of the patient ’s illness
2. identifying the patient ’s social resources as factors that will contribute to the
intervention
3. formulating treatment objectives and obstacles in order to begin treatment with co-
constructed representations of the clinical problem, integrating the viewpoints of the
patient and of the clinical team and care network.
We start with a formulation that models how mentalizing can be used as a tool for
communicating about needs and emotions, and work through a collaboration that aims
to secure safe and meaningful relationships, as well as ties to social and professional
environments. In the following sections we shall examine each of these three clinical
reference points separately, using the clinical example of Robert.
Clinical Example: Robert
Robert is a 39-year-old man who is seeking treatment to enable him to “be able to talk to
potential clients who show interest in my artwork .”Robert was first diagnosed with schizo-
phrenia at the age of 23. He suffered relapses/hospitalizations twice in his twenties and
once in his thirties, all in the context of failed attempts to initiate romantic relationships,
which each time led to delusional syndromes, visual and auditory hallucinations, and
eventually hospitalization. The first hospitalization lasted almost a year, the second and
third hospitalizations were shorter in duration (3 months), and the most recent one, when
he was 33 years old, lasted approximately 1 month. Robert recalls his childhood as having
been entrenched in the fear of being separated from his family, especially his mother, a
housewife whom Robert describes as “a very critical and solitary woman .”He describes his
relationship with his father, a military engineer, as distant. He recalls himself as a slightly
overweight boy who always felt there was something wrong with him inside. His body
always felt like a strange, vulnerable, and unpredictable place, and as a young adult he
suffered from severe anxiety about contracting life-ending diseases through any kind of
contact with women. Robert ’s first psychotic breakdown happened approximately
18 months after he moved to a university campus to start a Master ’s degree in sociology.
By that time, his social use of cannabis had increased to daily solitary use in his new
university surroundings. During the first year he felt very lonely, and eventually opened up
about his romantic feelings to a long-time female friend, only to be rejected. During the254 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
following months, his natural suspiciousness toward people gave way to paranoid ideation
about the intentions of classmates and teaching staff. He became delusional to the point
of retreating to his hall of residence, and taking day-long baths because “I only felt safe
when immersed in water .”He was hospitalized after he attempted to fill his entire bedroom
with water. At that point he experienced hostile voices and command hallucinations,
which were commenting on his behavior and ordering him to perform bizarre actions.
At present Robert spends most of his time at a local pub, where he can meet with familiar
faces, all of whom are unemployed people. He receives a small benefit payment because of
his incapacity to work due to psychiatric illness. He has been training in a variety of
painting techniques, and this has attracted the attention of his pub mates. A friend of a
friend offered him a couple of square meters of space for him to display his paintings at a
weekly, highly popular open-air market. Although his paintings attract much interest, he is
incapable of talking to the potential clients.
Assessing the Developmental Stage of the Illness
In the following section, we shall consider the different stages of the progression of
Robert ’s illness, keeping in mind that MBT for psychosis may be helpful at any stage of
illness. First, we shall distinguish four distinct periods along the developmental and
clinical continuum of Robert ’s psychotic illness [ 17]:
1. premorbid stage
2. clinical high-risk stage
3. first episode of psychosis
4. psychosis trajectory stage.
The premorbid stage encompasses the period from conception to adolescence, during
which distal risk factors such as genetic and perinatal risk, childhood and adolescent
environmental risk factors (e.g., bullying, cannabis use), and personality factors (e.g.,
schizotypy; see Lenzenweger [ 18]) interact. In Robert ’s case, the premorbid signs include
a family history of schizophrenia (affecting his grandfather and uncle on the paternal
side) and perhaps subtle schizotypal signs such as uneasiness with his own body, feeling
that something is not right with himself, and some shyness and social withdrawal during
adolescence. Of course these signs would require a proper evaluation, as they could also
be the result of internalizing problems. Interestingly, recent research has found that the
most common premorbid psychopathological manifestations that precede psychosis
onset include mood disorders, drug misuse, and anxiety disorders [ 19].
Next, during the clinical high-risk stage, subsyndromal symptoms such as perceptual,
cognitive, or behavioral abnormalities often occur, but their frequency and functional
impact are below the diagnostic threshold for psychosis spectrum disorders (for further
information, see Schultze-Lutter et al. [ 20]). This stage may be an important opportunity
for prevention, because some individuals might ask for professional help, although they do
not always explicitly report pre-psychotic symptoms [ 12]. For Robert, the signs included
subtle thought blockages, ideas of reference (having the impression that people, particu-
larly strangers, paid extra attention to him), and psychotic-like experiences such as hearing
music playing when he was alone in the family home or in the university hall of residence
(for clinical interviews evaluating clinical high risk, see Schultze-Lutter et al. [ 21]). Robert
did not seek help for these phenomena —although they started approximately 1 year beforePsychosis 255
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
he increased his cannabis use, he would write them off, thinking that they were best
explained by his new cannabis habits.
Robert ’s first psychotic episode probably lasted for 1 –2 months before it was detected
by his best friend. At that point he was spending entire weeks cloistered in his room, and
held the secret belief that a specific breed of aliens would come to make the world a better
place; he was responsible for greeting them and showing them around so that they could
accomplish their mission. This gave him both a sense of a meaningful existence, and an
immense fear that he might not be able to deal with such a great responsibility. He recalls
bizarre phenomena, such as feeling that rain came from the ground, not the sky, or that
entire football matches that he watched on television would proceed without the ball ever
going out of bounds. This last impression alerted his best friend, who questioned him
and only then realized the extent of the delusional state that Robert was experiencing.
The friend alerted Robert ’s family and the university ’s mental health network, which
promptly intervened after the episode in which Robert flooded his room. He was
hospitalized shortly thereafter.
Further along the developmental continuum, trajectories following the first diagnosis
of psychosis can, schematically speaking, follow three different routes. Almost one-third
of patients receive a first diagnosis, and treatment leads to remission without relapse
[22]. Another one-third to half of patients who receive a first diagnosis go on to develop
a lifelong pattern of treatment, recovery, and relapse [ 22]. The prognosis appears to
partly depend on premorbid factors, such as cognitive and interpersonal functioning and
negative symptoms, as well as the duration of untreated psychosis [ 23]. Finally, the
remainder (up to one-third) of patients develop a chronic state of psychosis, which is
often resistant to treatment and accompanied by severe functional deficits; these can also
be accompanied by cognitive deficits, as well as significant impairments in autonomous
daily functioning.
Depending on the stage at which Robert would hypothetically have encountered a
service that delivered an MBT-informed approach to psychosis, the treatment interven-
tions would initially need to be tailored to the clinical needs of that stage (for a full
description, see Armando et al. [ 12]) and modified for any subsequent stage. The principle
is that in the first two stages, MBT-informed psychosocial and psychoeducational treat-
ment is provided to reinforce the protective factors, using a group approach (either within
the family or with young adults), as well as providing some psychoeducation on the nature
of subclinical signs of psychosis (e.g., delusional thinking, perceptual abnormalities).
Importantly, at this stage, the patient ’s stress factors, triggers of anxiety, depressive
ruminations, and social withdrawal must be made explicit and shared with the care
network. If individual psychotherapy is accessible and feasible, this can also be useful
[3]. If existing risk then transitions to full-blown psychosis, the patient will require referral
to services that can provide specialized care for psychosis. As with the treatment of patients
with eating disorders (see Chapter 12 ) or antisocial personality disorder (see Chapter 7 ),
MBT is not an all-encompassing approach that can address the full set of patients ’clinical
needs. Usually, multidisciplinary teams trained in specialized care andmentalization-based
approaches will adapt their multidimensional treatment plan to foster mentalizing with the
patient, the family, and the nursing/educational teams in order to maximize the potential
success of the intervention. Similar to AMBIT (Adaptive Mentalization-Based Integrative
Treatment) (see Chapter 17 and [ 24]), an adaptive clinical approach can stimulate mental-
izing as an active ingredient that ideally permeates the multilevel interventions that are256 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
necessary during the third and fourth stages of psychosis progression. In terms of clinical
staging and tools, group psychoeducation, family sessions, and psychotherapy sessions will
involve MBT techniques, for which the key adaptations of the clinical principles of MBT
are described later in this chapter.
Identifying the Social Resources within the Treatment
Although patients with psychosis typically have fewer significant interpersonal relation-
ships and relatively reduced social activities compared with individuals with other mental
health diagnoses, clinicians can often underestimate the importance of attachment
relationships in the patient ’s life, especially if the patient suffers from strong negative
symptoms of withdrawal. Yet interpersonal relationships are central to the quality of life of
patients living with psychosis [ 25,26]. Therefore a careful analysis of the key interpersonal
and attachment figures available to the patient will significantly contribute to the success of
the treatment. These figures typically include family members, other service users, key-
workers in the community, or other significant individuals in the patient ’sl i f e .S u p p o r t i n g
and empowering the key interpersonal and attachment figures may constitute the single
most important factor for increasing the quality of life of patients with psychosis.
Clinical Example: Robert (continued)
Robert ’s testimony is compelling with regard to the centrality of interpersonal relationships
in his trajectory with psychosis. When questioned on what helped to get him out of the
difficult periods, he promptly indicated two people:
ROBERT :The first time I got out of hospital, I was almost mute. My dad, who by then had retired,
insisted that we take a 1-hour walk almost every other day. We took these regular walks for at
least a couple of years. I did not speak a word for the first few months; I was convinced he hated
me. I was in really bad shape; he was always waiting for me to catch up. I noticed that he seemed
to insist that I show up for these walks, and somehow I discovered he could be patient with me.
I started perceiving that he was actually enjoying spending time with me. That made me
feel normal.
After all my hospitalizations, I had lost all my friends except one. He ’s the one who initially
alerted everyone back at the university, and he stuck with me through all the mess that followed.
I don ’t know why really. But I am grateful. I feel he ’s always treated me like Robert, not like some
lunatic who ’d lost it, like all the doctors would treat me. He was just with me, and I remained a
friend to him. In a world where everyone seems to want to put you in the loony bin, to avoid you
or not trust you, it was extremely precious to have him maintain a friendship with me. We still
have coffee together, and sometimes I feel I can help him to sort things out.
Often, significant individuals in the patient ’s life will experience bouts of compassion
fatigue; they may also be discouraged when the psychosis leads to fluctuations in symptoms
or a need for (re-)hospitalization. Significant individuals may give up trying to help in the
face of strong avoidance, lack of reciprocity, and low energy on the part of the patient. The
care team ’s support in keeping mentalizing active in the interpersonal network of the patient
is critical to the journey with psychosis. When these relationships are explicitly integrated
into the case formulation and treatment plan, they are usually more readily included inPsychosis 257
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
network meetings during difficult periods. A key point is to address the needs of the
caregiving environment in order to sustain positive trajectories during psychosis [ 27].
Furthermore, friendships with other service users are likely to develop and signifi-
cantly contribute to the patient ’s quality of life and well-being. Often, attending psycho-
social and therapeutic activities in the service may be the only regular and reliable social
activity for patients. In this framework, monitoring of friendships and levels of interper-
sonal trust will act as a barometer of well-being for many service users. Associations
between regular contact with friends and decreased negative symptoms have been
reported [ 28]. Guided peer groups have been shown to increase quality of life [ 29].
Work on building a mentalizing culture contributes to both trust and feelings of
belonging, which protect against not only the exacerbation of psychotic symptoms but
also internalizing symptoms that may lead to depression and suicidal ideation [ 30].
Formulating Concrete Treatment Goals in Keeping with
Mentalizing Abilities
Formulation is a key aspect of any clinical intervention in MBT. When these interven-
tions are used with patients whose capacity for mentalizing is either underdeveloped or
severely compromised, clinicians will find it useful to think of the formulation as a two-
sided coin. On one side of the coin is the full and complex formulation of the clinician;
on the other side is the formulation tool —that is, the actual explicit formulation used in
MBT, which is usually in writing (or sometimes other forms, such as drawing) and
agreed upon by both the patient and the clinician. The full and complex formulation
represents an exercise in making the case formulation in the therapist ’s mind, on the
basis of what is shared by the patient during the assessment sessions. The formulation
usually includes a number of sections, and benefits from being made explicit (for details,
seeChapter 4 ). However, it is often the case that these complex descriptions of assess-
ments can be read by the patient as if they are written in a foreign language, and this
experience can be alienating for the patient. When working with individuals who are
seeking treatment related to psychosis, clinicians must be aware that cognitive complex-
ity can actually cause breakdowns in mentalizing. Therefore careful attention should be
given to the process of formulating, jointly with the patient, treatment goals that include
the essential elements of an MBT formulation. Let us consider a small part of a
formulation that was jointly created with Robert.
Clinical Example: Formulation Sheet (Reusable Tool) Used with Robert during the
Formulation Process
My Treatment Objectives: What I Want from Treatment
/C15I would like to (doing): Be able to talk to clients who are interested in my artwork.
/C15I would like to (feeling): Control my anxiety better when I ’m with people.
/C15I would like to (thinking): Stop aggressive thoughts taking over in my head.
Obstacles to My Objectives: What Might Get in the Way
/C15I can (doing): Start smoking cannabis heavily and then retreat.
/C15I can (feeling): Get anxious, and then keep away from people.
/C15I can (thinking): Feel like people don ’t want to talk to me, so I stay silent.258 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
When engaging in the formulation process with Robert, the first key point is to start
off from his main interpersonal motive —talking to clients about his artwork.
Specifically, the clinician initiates a conversation with Robert about treatment goals
and obstacles to treatment. Using a sheet of paper divided into two sections ( “My
Treatment Objectives ”and “Obstacles to My Objectives ”), each with three subsections
(“Doing, ”“Feeling, ”and “Thinking ”), the clinician asks Robert to summarize or write
down what they talk about, using the headings.
The shape that the formulation takes, in Robert ’s mind, is a rather teleological
structure. What he writes on the sheet involves an action taken as proof of an underlying
mental state. Therefore the clinician encourages him to make explicit his feelings and
thoughts, which at the time of evaluation appear noteworthy as treatment goals or
obstacles. During the assessment, Robert indicates that he can recognize some kind of
anxiety when he is with people generally, especially strangers, but does not really connect
this with his experience at the market where he displays his work. When asked what kind
of thoughts he would like help with, he switches to aggressive thoughts taking over in his
head. In Robert ’s mind, and in his experience, these are not linked to the episode at the
market, but they are what he would like some help with. Therefore this is written down,
and any potential links with the interpersonal and affective domains are noted as
treatment progresses.
The clinician then encourages Robert to write down some possible obstacles to
treatment, while carefully maintaining a collaborative process and avoiding over-
stimulating him. Indeed, as will be discussed later in this chapter, patients with
psychosis often promptly interpret criticism or hostile intentions when others formulate
thoughts that may involve some kind of expectation. Therefore, during the formulation
process, a key point is to engage with the obstacles that the patient can recognize and
about which they feel that they have at least a minimal level of agency. As can be noted
from Robert ’s formulation, asking him about the obstacles to treatment impairs his
mentalizing. His descriptions of feelings and thoughts are generic ( “I get anxious ”) and
are primarily described in teleological form, linked to behaviors. This indicates the
starting point from which to work with Robert. His teleological functioning needs to
be addressed before it is possible to move on to the next step for him, which is to
experience some agency over his anxiety and notice whether he is able to attenuate his
impulse to withdraw socially and limit the length of time for which he has to withdraw
from others.
In a similar way to other types of MBT, the initial phase will also include a
crisis plan (for details, see Chapter 4 ). In MBT for psychosis, the specialized team will
usually have established protocols for dealing with episodes of psychotic decom-
pensation. It is useful to go over past hospitalizations to identify the types of triggers
which may lead to the re-emergence of clinical needs that can only be addressed
by hospitalization. The clinician will attempt to establish a crisis plan with the
patient focused on identifying triggers and planning stages of intervention that would
precede actual hospitalization. It is also worthwhile considering the advantages and
disadvantages of hospitalization, in order to sketch out the mental landscape of how the
patient thinks about past episodes and when they could envisage that this option
is reasonable.
To summarize, an approach to clinical intervention in patients with psychosis will
explicitly outline three clinical reference points at the initiation of treatment:Psychosis 259
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
1. the stage of development of psychosis
2. the social and interpersonal resources available to the patient, including their
important attachment relationships
3. a shared collaborative formulation of treatment aims and obstacles.
The staging approach orients the treatment team to treatment targets adapted to the
progression of illness, and indeed this may be important in order to avoid the use of multiple
interventions that address specific symptoms but fail to integrate the overall clinical needs of
the patient and their family. To date there is no research evidence of benefit from
psychoeducation for families with a member affected by psychosis, but such an intervention
is likely to contribute to a positive prognosis (for a description of mentalization-informed
family work, see Chapter 15 ). In the treatment strategy, specific attention is then given to
identifying and harnessing the interpersonal and social resources available to the patient, as
this will help to reduce their social alienation and focus the necessary clinical resources to
allow developmentally adapted social integration. Finally, building MBT for a patient with
psychosis involves engaging in a formulation process that can be adapted to the patient ’s
level of mentalizing, while fostering a collaborative and agentive process that is oriented
toward meaningful treatment goals and an awareness of obstacles that are likely to arise. Of
course, further mentalizing strengths and weaknesses are outlined within the formulation
and treatment plan. The next section will cover some of our basic assumptions about
psychosis as understood from an MBT-informed perspective.
Understanding Psychosis from an MBT-Informed Perspective
Changes in mentalizing are likely to account for part of the therapeutic effect of any treatment
for patients whose condition lies on the contin uum of clinical manifestations of psychosis.
Indeed, the three points enumerated in the previous section —staging the development of
psychosis, assessing the patient ’s attachment relationships, and co-creating a mentalizing
formulation —involve the mentalizing of others and self and an ability to regulate the
processes involved in social interactions, namely attention, emotion, and thinking about
intentions, behaviors, and group dynamics. Relationships to self and others will therefore
potentially stimulate mentalizing, but may also overwhelm the patient ’s capacity to mentalize.
This leads us to the main point of the MBT approach to psychosis. Critically, if we are to
inform our interventions using an MBT framework, we need to conceptualize the nature of
the relationship between mentalizing and core self-disturbances experienced by individuals
with psychosis as the central issue.
This section will begin with a review of conceptual developments that link psychosis
to mentalizing, followed by a summary of contemporary neuroscientific and clinical
conceptions of psychosis as a condition stemming from disturbances in core self-experi-
ence—the way the patient integrates (or fails to integrate) such experiences in their life
ties into clinical presentations of psychosis. The section ends with a discussion of the
links between core self-disturbances and non-mentalizing modes and the cycles of
ineffective mentalizing that are encountered in the clinical treatment of individuals with
psychosis, as they are of considerable importance for treatment.
Psychosis and Mentalizing: Historical Links
The relevance of mentalizing in the field of psychotherapy for schizophrenia dates back
to both Eugene Bleuler and Sigmund Freud [ 31–34]. Bleuler coined the term260 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
“schizophrenias ”to signify clinical states characterized by a splitting of the mind [ 31]. He
did not subscribe to the biologically grounded view proposing a direct link between
biology and schizophrenic functional deficits. Although early psychoanalysts did not
specifically use the term “mentalizing, ”they observed the troubling disconnect between
affect and mind in their patients with psychosis, who experienced the activities of feeling
and thinking with a reduced sense of agency, and appeared to suffer severe mental pain
when experiencing such a disconnect within themselves.
These characterizations from the field of psychoanalysis resonate with phenomeno-
logical accounts of psychosis [ 35], and with recent developments in metacognitive
reflection and insight therapy. Contemporary phenomenological accounts suggest that
an instability in experiencing minimal selfhood acts as the basis for schizophrenia. This
instability can manifest as diminished self-integration (e.g., going through one ’s day with
the feeling that “I am not totally me ,”and that somehow “a part of I is missing from my
experience ”). It can also manifest as hyper-reflectivity, evident as states of hyperaware-
ness of stimuli that are usually trivial or tacit. This instability signals what phenomen-
ologists call a core self-disturbance —that is, a fundamental disturbance in experiencing
oneself as the subject of one ’s experience, which results in one experiencing reduced
agency in relation to one ’s life. Interestingly, the psychoanalysts John Auerbach and
Sidney Blatt hypothesized that “Schizophrenic hyper-reflexivity may follow from failure
to establish or find a bodily sense of self ”([36], p. 306). The potential disintegration of
links between bodily signals and mental processing is a common leitmotif across most
theories of psychosis. From a psychotherapeutic perspective, Paul Lysaker and colleagues
have developed a model of psychotherapy that is focused on metacognitive reflection,
where metacognition constitutes a key psychological process sustaining the binding or
integration of thoughts and feelings [ 37]. Their view is similar to the approach in MBT,
where the disturbing and threatening nature of self-experiences in psychosis is empha-
sized, and the psychotic symptoms are seen to provide ultimate protection against loss of
agency, affect, meaning, and self-coherence. In this framework, working on mentalizing,
metacognition, and other higher-order processes may help to alleviate some of the pain
engendered by experiences with oneself and others. However, mentalizing dysfunction is
not the cause of psychosis. Following contemporary neuroscientific models, which are
reviewed in the next section, and in line with psychoanalytic descriptions of schizophre-
nia, psychotic experiences are conceptualized as “disturbances in core self, ”and psych-
otic symptoms are viewed as attempts to regulate and give shape to such disturbances.
From Neuroscience to the Consulting Room
The mentalizing account of core self-disturbances is consistent with a contemporary
neuroscience perspective which hypothesizes that psychotic experiences entail a discon-
nect between feeling and thinking (sensory and cognitive priors), and critically, that this
disconnect temporarily disables the individual from integrating their senses and
thoughts into a coherent self-experience [ 38]. Readers who have never experienced
psychosis can try to imagine a rising sense of panic stimulated by intense arousal; this
panic can lead to experiencing oneself as “out of control ”and subject to potential
annihilation —an existential panic. This example could be conceived of as a momentary
psychotic experience where bodily arousal (the sensory system) cannot connect with and
be regulated by one ’s mind (the cognitive system), which momentarily threatens one ’sPsychosis 261
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
self-integrity. Similarly, but at the cognitive edge of the experience, persecutory thoughts
can lead to intense reflective activity (hyper-reflectivity), leading one to experience a
momentary loss of bodily sensations and to experience oneself as split from one ’s body.
Recognizing this sensory –cognitive disconnect helps clinicians to imagine and empathize
with the kind of process that underlies the patient ’s psychotic experience, while prevent-
ing them from applying meaning to the psychotic symptoms, which in the experiential
moment may be harmful as it adds to the split cognitive experience and intensifies the
disconnect. Imagining this whole process may help the clinician to maintain their own
mentalizing, which is necessary for them to be able to “ground ”the patient and pull them
away from their symptoms.
Let us take an example from an individual session, during which a patient signals the
experience of a sensory –cognitive disconnect. This segment takes place during an
exchange in which the clinician was exploring, somewhat cognitively, the patient ’s lack
of motivation to look for a job.
Clinical Example: Signaling a Sensory –Cognitive Disconnect
PATIENT :Don’t know really, I just can ’t get myself to look for a job, even thinking about it is ...
CLINICIAN :...Is...? What is it like not thinking about it?
PATIENT :I’m feeling myself coming out of my body ...
CLINICIAN :Oh! I ’m sorry, indeed, I am noticing that you are struggling ...
PATIENT :I can ’t think ...just ...no, don ’t say anything ...
CLINICIAN :OK ...(The clinician is actively regulating self to maintain a psychological presence to the
patient. )
PATIENT :I can feel myself drifting away from my body ...Aargh ...I can ’t take it any more ...(The
patient screws up his face and stares blankly, indicating the rising dreadful experience .)
CLINICIAN :It’s OK, I ’m here with you ( The clinician is slowly moving in the patient ’s line of sight to
stimulate the patient ’s sensory system in a non-threatening way. )
PATIENT :(After 15 seconds of silence during which the patient moves his body in apparent attempts to
cope with the experience, he looks at the therapist, blinks twice, and adjusts his body posture slightly.)
CLINICIAN :It’s OK, let ’s just slow down ...(The clinician is actively trying to stay in the moment and
provide non-threatening and relaxed mirroring from his own bodily gestures. )
PATIENT :(The patient looks at the therapist again, and more readily adjusts his body posture; gradually
his eyes unlock from the blank frightened stare, and he glances briefly at the clinician. )
CLINICIAN :(on seeing the patient ’s bodily cues of regulation ) It seems it can feel unsafe for you in here.
Just to let you know my only intention right now is to help make this feel safer for you. ( The
clinician gradually reintegrates the sensory –cognitive connection. ) It seems you were quite
frightened for a moment there. Is it OK if we talk about it, or should we leave it for another time?
PATIENT :It’s OK, sometimes it ’s too much, it ’s like you are getting inside my head.262 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
From this temporary breakdown, the individual with psychosis is prone to experience
thoughts as sensations ( “I can feel my internal voice being broadcast ”) or to experience
sensations as overwhelming ( “My racing heart is going to burst, and I can feel blood
coming out of my eyes ”). Current neuroscientific accounts suggest that individuals
appraise the world using sensory and cognitive priors (i.e., minute “in-the-moment ”
predictions of how the world is), and then employ incoming information to update and
align these priors into “refreshed ”priors, which hopefully come close to reality [ 39].
Neuroscientists are confirming a long-standing clinical observation, namely that we
create perception. In other words, our perceptions are much more the process of our
own doing than that of “reality. ”Reality as we know it is built upon the sensory and
cognitive priors, which successively build our sense that the world is a continuous and
predictable place through a complex hierarchical structure of representations. Indeed,
when brain function is stable, that works well for us, and we create the sense that we are
continuous beings in a continuous and perceivable reality.
A key point here is that we “self-evidence ”—that is, we need to act on the world in
order to maintain our feeling of existing and being in relationship to the world. When
locked in isolation or sensory deprivation, any brain is likely to start hallucinating [ 40].
An internal feedback loop between intention and action is key to perceiving that one ’s
own intentionality can have an impact on:
/C15one’s own behaviors
/C15others ’perception and behaviors
/C15the physical environment.
For individuals who are experiencing psychosis, it appears that feedback loops, or
self-monitoring mechanisms [ 41], can unexpectedly disconnect. The patient with psych-
osis, and often the clinician as well, will have difficulty in tracing the triggers of
temporary disconnects. They can be affective in nature, but their temporality is often
less clear than, for example, in borderline personality disorder (BPD). To summarize,
contemporary neuroscience suggests that temporary disconnects between sensory and
cognitive integration are linked to impaired self and other monitoring and loss of the
experience of agency, and result in the different manifestations of psychotic symptoms.
Subjectively, this process plunges patients with psychosis into core self-disturbances
of varying duration, in which they experience themselves as being alienated from sensory
and mental function, as well as having a profoundly disturbed sense of agency in the
domains of thinking, feeling, or behaving. These mechanisms can be placed on a
continuum of severity. For example, when access to a stimulating environment is
interrupted (as during the COVID-19 pandemic) or more severely thwarted (as in
psychotic states), the cognitive and sensory systems decalibrate, leading to atypical states
in thinking (e.g., more or less delusional beliefs) and feeling (e.g., feeling that one ’s
actions can be more or less controlled by an external agent). We hypothesize that atypical
connectivity between sensory and cognitive signaling alters self-experience —that is, the
experience of oneself as a coherent body –mind unit that is in a relatively predictable
relationship to other people and things in the world [ 3].
Such an account has clinical implications when working in accordance with the
mentalization-based model. Indeed, an MBT clinician, during a session, will —as usual —
maintain the balance between the cognitive and affective poles of mentalizing (see
Chapters 2 and 4). Importantly, the clinician needs to pay attention to the patient ’sPsychosis 263
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
experience in the room, in particular how they experience reflectivity, and how they may
experience concrete material that might be used in the room (e.g., paper, chair, flip chart,
pencils). The clinician will seek to help to regulate this felt experience by mapping it
against the experience that comes from reflective activity. Given that mental functioning
in psychosis tends to disconnect, the sensory –cognitive balance will be a focus of
constant monitoring during the session. Mentalizing work can be potentially over-
activating for patients. To guide clinical work further, we find it useful to distinguish
clinical presentations that indicate when mentalizing work can be pursued, as outlined in
the next section.
Psychosis in the Patient ’s Life: Clinical Presentations
To build a mentalizing framework within a specialized clinical practice when treating
psychotic disorders, it is necessary to embed the phenomenology of psychosis within the
MBT framework. As we mentioned earlier in this chapter, a variety of psychotic
phenomena can be represented as severe disturbances to the experience of oneself as a
coherent unit —the experience itself threatens the individual ’s self-integrity.
Schematically, there are three different clinical presentations, which reflect different
degrees of integration or disintegration of the psychotic experiences in the patient ’s life.
A patient may move from one presentation to another in relation to developmental
stages, life events and challenges, and access to medical care and psychosocial resources.
1.Decompensation occurs . This presentation marks the failure of psychotic symptoms
to hold the disturbing self-experience. Within this clinical state, the decompensated
patient relies on the external environment to contain and stabilize profoundly
disturbing experiences to such an extent that psychotic decompensations often lead
to hospitalization, and may require lengthy inpatient care.
2.There is significant functional impairment, but decompensation is avoided . This
state prevents the individual from having a fully autonomous and participative life. The
clinical presentation usually builds upon a delusional narrative, in which the patient is
experiencing a relationship to the world and others that is anchored in targeted or
generalized fear and suspicion of others, as well as profound distrust in their own
capacities to deal with the regular challenges of relationships, professional activities,
and other activities that entail personal responsibility and accountability. The clinical
presentation involves varying levels of psychotic symptoms (positive, negative, or
disorganized symptoms) of a magnitude that can be managed in outpatient and
community care. In this clinical presentation, the individual experiences regular
disturbances in the core self, structured within a delusional narrative that offers an
explanatory model of the phenomena (e.g., experiencing that one is under investigation
by the highest government authorities). Within the course of psychosis, the patient is
prone to decompensation following overwhelming core self-disturbances.
3.There is integration and gradual deactivation of the intensity of psychotic clinical
states through a number of different contexts —psychosocial activities, group
psychoeducation, significant relationships, vocational training, and psychotherapy, to
name a few. Ideally, the social context will offer a variety of opportunities and
adaptations to allow social stimulation at a level that can be withstood by the patient.
Integration of the vulnerable part of self-experience is the hallmark of this clinical
presentation, and places the individual on the path toward recovery.264 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
It is evident that mentalizing work can assist in the second and third of these clinical
presentations. In fully decompensated states, by contrast, mentalizing work with the
patient will only cause more disorganization. However, it is important that carers and
clinicians who are helping these patients maintain their own mentalizing during these
times, and do not treat patients as dehumanized beings who require only pharmaceutical
interventions. Indeed, patients retain some memories of their crises, particularly of the
people who managed to be kind to them even when their psychological distress was
intense.
Linking Core Self-Disturbances to Non-Mentalizing Modes
and Cycles of Non-Mentalizing
In MBT jargon, experiencing “disturbances in core self ”means that patients are experi-
encing themselves and the world by using non-mentalizing modes. These modes result
from an attempt by the patient with psychosis to manage self-disturbances by embedding
them in non-mentalizing (for clinical examples, see Figure 10.1 ). At their most extreme,
non-mentalizing modes are fully embedded within or take the form of psychotic
symptoms. For example, paranoid thinking may initially take the form of a delusional
mood in which psychic equivalence is transitory, but gradually a fixed delusion forms in
which psychic equivalence of thought is dominant and fixed. Hyper-reflectivity repre-
sents an extreme form of pretend mode; sudden delusional beliefs based on actions and
behaviors ( “The traffic lights changed to red and the car that stopped had a number plate
with my initials in it so I knew the aliens had arrived ”) may represent extreme forms of
teleological functioning, and other ordinary events are interpreted in the same way (e.g.,
a patient walks into his therapist ’s office, and later says “The chairs were rearranged when
I walked in; you clearly aren ’t interested in listening ”).
During the first stage of evaluation and case formulation, discussed earlier, the
clinician and the patient attempt to map out the strengths and weaknesses in mentalizing
BENIGN BORDERLINE PSYCHOTIC
Psychic
equivalence
Teleological
mode
Pretend
modeOh, yeah, that’s
my boss, he just
thinks I’m lazy.My boss thinks I’m so
useless, I don’t think I
can cope any more.My boss is reading my
mind, I have to go into
the room next door to
block his mind vision.
Mum has given me the
largest piece of cake,
it feels like I am her
favourite child.Mum has given the
largest piece of cake
to my sister, she’s
making me pay. The way Mum looked at
me when she gave me
the cake means that the
cake is poisoned.
I’m old enough to
take care of myself,
just leave me
alone.Leave, you fool! Doesn’t
make the slightest difference,
I’ll find somebody in no time
and live a happy life.I often reflect on the use of
relationships, and it strikes me
as a very humanoid fact, and
not in sync with the greater
rule of Cosmos. In fact …
Fig. 10.1 Non-mentalizing modes along the clinical continuum, with illustrative examples.Psychosis 265
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
to this level of detail, and, as we shall see, one important aspect is to identify idiosyncratic
triggers that tend to be followed by impaired psychotic mentalizing. Figure 10.1 shows
the continuum of non-mentalizing modes with examples of psychotic manifestations in
psychic equivalence, teleological, and pretend modes.
The temporary sensory –cognitive disconnect, and the impossibility of integrating
incoming sensory or cognitive information to reconnect, provides a clinical framework
for thinking about different symptoms of psychosis in mentalizing terms. During
instances of disturbances in the core self, sensory and cognitive psychological processes
are active but imprecise (decalibrated or disconnected), leading to experiences of various
forms of loss in personal agency, which may be related to bodily, cognitive, and/or
affective control. Part(s) of selfhood, experienced in the here and now, are alienated. In
other types of psychopathology, such self-experience is rescued by alien self -representa-
tions (see Chapter 2 ). For example, individuals with BPD will experience intense
psychological saliency when experiencing themselves as, for example, “bad,”“ugly, ”or
“worthless. ”In a sense, alien self-representations can help these individuals to cope with
self-disturbances; however, such representations can be quite threatening to their psy-
chological integrity because of their intense affective burden, and can often lead to
aggressive behaviors (violence, self-harm, and suicide attempts) linked to the affective
pressure emanating from the alien self-experience. Importantly, psychological contact
with alien self-representations may also lead to dissociation, which is a hallmark of a
psychotic process activated as an attempt to protect psychological self-integrity. For
patients with psychosis, this disconnect can be sudden and will not necessarily be
accompanied by manifest changes in affective arousal. It is more likely that shifts in
body posture, gaze, and speech are better indicators of disturbing self-experiences.
For the patient, the atypical cerebral activity that is sustaining psychotic states will
then reorganize in unusual ways of experiencing one ’s body –mind unit in relation to the
world. One key assumption in MBT for psychosis is that disturbances in the core self are
accompanied by a cycle of impaired mentalizing, which can be momentary or, in
occurrences of psychotic breakdown, more sustained. Figure 10.2 attempts to map out
some of the subjective consequences and ensuing effects on mentalizing in individuals
who are experiencing disturbances in the core self.
As shown in Figure 10.2 , and starting from the assumption that psychosis is intrinsic-
ally linked to instability in core self-experience, the ensuing vulnerability in self-integrity
and agency has a negative effect on the individual ’s capacity to mentalize (point 1 in
Figure 10.2 ). This is not surprising given that, for any individual, threats to self-integrity
shut down mentalizing. With regard to the initiation of non-mentalizing cycles, and in
line with MBT for other types of psychopathology, the identification of idiosyncratic
triggers of disturbances in the core self will provide key information for the treatment.
Research suggests that in addition to attachment stress, triggers can fall into three broad
domains —intense affective experiences, social evaluation, and cognitive complexity.
Additional triggers might have been identified by the patient and, when included, will
enrich the collaboratively created formulation.
Psychosis is further associated with information-processing biases, such as jumping
to conclusions, which impair the individual ’s capacity to consider contrary evidence or
alternative perspectives (point 2 in Figure 10.2 ); this means that subjective apprehension
of reality can become very rigid and impermeable. Non-mentalized ways of understand-
ing self and other in psychic equivalence, pretend, or teleological modes will not be
counterbalanced by a mentalizing part of the patient ’s mind, and these modes are likely266 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
to temporarily take over the patient ’s subjectivity as a way to maintain minimal agency
over selfhood (point 3 in Figure 10.2 ). In such instances, verbal/symbolic content such as
cognitive challenges or interpretations are likely to widen the disconnect between feeling
and knowing (point 4 in Figure 10.2 ). A common protective strategy adopted by patients
is to retreat into their own subjective viewpoint as a way to diminish external stimulation
and maintain a degree of internal coherence with themselves (point 5 in Figure 10.2 ).
Unfortunately, over time this cycle of non-mentalizing reinforces reliance on symptoms
and strengthens delusional narratives as ways of understanding and interpreting self,
others, and the world (point 6 in Figure 10.2 ). Working with patients who are prone to
cycles of non-mentalizing that sustain psychotic psychological processing will entail
some adjustments in our approach to delivering MBT.
MBT for Psychosis: Key Elements of Practice
In this final section of the chapter, some of the key clinical implications for each domain
of intervention in MBT (as explained in Chapters 4 and5) are outlined as they relate to
working with patients with psychosis.
Treatment and Session Structure
As we discussed in the introduction to this chapter, MBT can offer a valuable clinical tool
for specialized services that are providing treatment for patients with psychosis. The
structure of the treatment will be adapted to the service ’s culture and competencies.
From the standpoint of MBT, the three clinical reference points mentioned earlier in the
chapter will be established at the beginning of treatment:/C15determining the clinical stage of psychosis
/C15identifying the patient ’s social resources
/C15formulating treatment objectives.
Disturbance in
core self  
5. Retreat into own
subjective viewpoint
on reality6. Symptom
maintenance/
exacerbationIntense affectSocial evaluation
Cognitive complexity
1. Impaired
mentalizing
2. Loss of capacity to
consider external
cues/alternative
perspective
3. Non-mentalizing
attempts to rescue
agency4. Uncertainty about
reality linked to
symbolic/verbal content
Fig. 10.2 Characterizing the cycle of non-mentalizing following core self-disturbance.Psychosis 267
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Depending on the clinical stage of the illness and the jointly agreed treatment object-
ives, a combination of psychoeducation and group and individual therapy is employed. As
is usual in MBT, the formulation and treatment plan will be adapted to the level of
mentalizing of the patient, and will take into account the sensitivity and capacities of the
individual for self-regulation and attentional control in the context of individual and group
settings. As a complement to a clinical evaluation, an assessment of mentalizing identifies:
/C15strengths in mentalizing
/C15triggers of disturbances in the core self
/C15patterns of use of non-mentalizing modes.
The objectives of establishing a treatment structure are to foster agency, to engage the
patient, and to harness affective, motivational, and cognitive resources in planning
treatment and imagining the next feasible steps for enabling the patient to live a more
fulfilling and meaningful life.
In terms of session format, psychoeducational groups for psychosis have been
adapted in different services and tailored to educate participants and their families and
significant others about:
/C15psychosis
/C15the nature of psychotic symptoms
/C15different ways to integrate the life trajectory with psychosis into a personal
development narrative
/C15engaging with oneself and threats to self
/C15attachment relationships.
During these sessions, mentalizing is presented as a generic capacity to construct a
mental representation of oneself and others as thinking and feeling beings; these mental
representations help to regulate hyper-reflective thinking and can also sustain the
individual ’s sense of personal agency, temporal awareness, and, perhaps most import-
antly, their ability to genuinely relate to and be affected by others [ 42]. Group MBT
sessions have also been adapted for patients with psychosis. These weekly groups follow a
structured format, with a maximum of eight participants, and with a duration that can be
reduced to 60 minutes depending on the clinical presentations —that is, the symptoms
and neuropsychological functioning —of the patients.
As in group work with other patient groups with important impairments in mental-
izing, the group interventions may include mediation material, such as that used in
groups with severely troubled parents (e.g., the Lighthouse Project [ 43]). The use of
mediation techniques such as playfulness, games, or drawing are linked to the formula-
tion and treatment objectives, while making explicit the path that links the types of in-
session activities to the actual objectives in the personal and interpersonal domains
outside the consultation room. The idea of mediation tools is to adapt them creatively
to foster a process of mentalizing self and others in explicit ways, and charting the
regulatory effect on the participants. Lastly, individual therapy is used when the patient ’s
clinical presentation and treatment objectives suggest that it might be useful, and in
services that have the capacity to provide long-term (18 months minimum) individual
sessions. Formulation and structure are key elements for safeguarding against pretend-
mode functioning and for focusing on objectives that can explicitly help to augment the
patient ’s ability to genuinely relate to self and others, and to increasingly engage in active
and participatory roles within the social domain of functioning.268 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
A summary of key points about the structuring of treatment is given in Box 10.1 .
The Not-Knowing Stance
For any clinician it can be quite challenging to sustain a not-knowing stance and genuine
curiosity about mental states in the face of blatantly delusional beliefs or other confusing
psychotic manifestations. As in any other clinical situation, the key to effective MBT
intervention is the clinician ’s self-regulation. Although this may appear simplistic, it can
become quite challenging when psychotic manifestations erupt. These manifestations
can induce fear, confusion, and thought blockages in the clinician, and also tiredness,
apathy, and a sense of meaninglessness. It is crucial for the clinician to monitor their own
arousal and their ability and disposition to mentalize in order to maintain the not-
knowing stance or reactivate it when it has been lost.
The epistemic trust framework is particularly valuable for clinicians in such circum-
stances. The clinician can tune into the patient ’s experience through reflective curiosity:
“What is it like for the patient to experience such persecution, such disorganization in thinking?
What is it like for them, specifically? What is the actual effect on functioning? How is the effect
experienced by the patient? “These questions need to be “translated ”when they are asked of
the patient, to put them into words that model curiosity about mental states and make
curiosity about those mental states relevant to the patient.
The not-knowing stance involves curiosity, respect for the patient ’s experience, and
observation of the effects that disturbances of the core self can exert on the patient, both in
the therapy session and in the patient ’s life. This stance will provide the opportunity to
engage in a mentalizing process in which the clinician will be able to observe the specific
dynamics that lead the patient to lose mentalizing, to experience perturbations in core self-
experience, and eventually to retrieve mentalizing or manage the more difficult moments.
The clinician will also be able to assess the different resources used by the patient to
regulate their distress in the various therapeutic settings (e.g., individual and group therapy
sessions). A summary of key points about the not-knowing stance is given in Box 10.2 .Box 10.1 Key points about the structuring of treatment.
/C15Define clinical reference points.
/C15Jointly establish a formulation as a collaborative process.
/C15Plan treatment settings.
/C15Anticipate and use mediation tools creatively.
Box 10.2 Key points about the not-knowing stance.
/C15Monitor the clinician ’s level of arousal and capacity to mentalize.
/C15Tune into curiosity about the patient ’s experience with psychosis.
/C15Find the words to make curiosity about mental states relevant for the patient.
/C15Notice the dynamics of loss of mentalizing and regaining mentalizing, as well as the
resources used by the patient.
/C15Dedicate clinical observation to the effects of the patient ’s psychotic narrative.
/C15Do not seek to explain the unexplainable, either to yourself or to the patient.Psychosis 269
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The Mentalizing Process
The following four elements of practice require the clinician who is delivering MBT to
carefully scaffold interventions, working from “safe”to more activating components.
The clinician establishes a basis for intervention by first securing a minimal degree of
joint attention. This is usually done through meta-communication, which is more
effective when it is marked as coming from the clinician. We provide a few examples
here to illustrate marking the clinician ’s intention to foster joint attention.
Clinical Example: Robert (continued)
Individual Setting
CLINICIAN :Robert, something came to my mind that I ’dl i k et os h a r e ,i ft h a t ’sO K ?Y o uw e r ej u s tt a l k i n g
about your dad, and then somehow I lost what you wanted to say about your relationship with him.
CLINICIAN :Robert, I ’m noticing you are very quiet and not looking at me today. That ’s fine with me,
no worries. I just wanted to check in whether everything was OK for you today, being here?
Psychoeducational Setting
CLINICIAN :Can I just ask for your attention? We are about to transition to the next topic for today, is
that all right for everybody? Robert? Johanna? Everyone? Do you have anything to add? OK, so
now I ’ll ask you to think about one person to whom you feel attached —can you write down that
person ’s name?
Group Setting
CLINICIAN :Robert, thanks for sharing your feelings on how we ended last week. I feel I now
understand your point of view much better. I hope that is similar for all of us? Can I propose we
try to all think about last week ’s emotions at the end of the group, from a personal point of view,
and maybe from the point of view of one other group member?
In all of these examples the clinician attempts to affectively mark their own perspec-
tive as a starting point for questions pertaining to the mental states in the patients ’
minds. As patients can experience mentalizing questions as literal intrusions, marking is
a key starting point for most interventions in MBT for psychosis. It also has the benefit
of repeatedly offering some modeling to distinguish self and other perspectives.
In many circumstances, clinicians will use mediation tools to foster a mentalizing
process. There is no validated set of mediation tools for MBT with psychosis, so the idea
is to follow some basic principles. First, playfulness is probably the most underrated and
underused dimension of clinical interventions with patients with psychosis. This is
probably due to the influence both of negative symptoms, which can affect the clinician ’s
own creativity and playfulness, and of uncertainty in the clinician ’s mind as to how well
the patient will tolerate humor and emotionally arousing positive affects. Although these
concerns are valid, playfulness is a very safe practice, especially when it is used in the
MBT framework. It sustains the clinician ’s engagement, and an MBT-informed clinician
will constantly monitor the effect of interventions on the patient ’s level of arousal.
Therefore the calibrated use of playfulness is key to the mentalizing process; playfulness270 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
can be obstructed by the climate of negativity which can permeate the treatment of long-
term psychosis, particularly when there are persistent symptoms such as withdrawal.
A critical intervention to stimulate the interpersonal mentalizing process is for the
clinician to make their own thought process explicit, genuine, and simple. As with any
other group of patients who experience mental states as potentially threatening, the
clinician needs to normalize the mental-state process through explicit divulging of clear
and simple mental processing leading to mentalizing questions. The clinician can also
use summaries to convey mental-state processing linked to external, perceivable aspects
of behavior, to connect perception and mental-state thinking, and to help the patient to
decode the links between non-verbal communication and mental-state processing.
Clinical Example: Connecting Mental State and Physical Expression
CLINICIAN :(pointing to his own face and head ) Robert, I can ’t see what type of face I ’m making, but
here I am wondering how I can interrupt you to ask a question?
CLINICIAN :(leaning in ) Johanna, I ’m leaning in here because I ’m wondering whether we ’ve said
something that has made you go silent. Would you like to comment on that, or do you wish to
keep silent for now?
A summary of key points about the mentalizing process is given in Box 10.3 .
Non-Mentalizing Modes
In order to address non-mentalizing modes in patients with psychosis, it is useful to go
back to the conceptualization of the non-mentalizing cycle in psychosis (described earlier
in this chapter), which provides the framework for intervention with psychotic mani-
festations in non-mentalizing modes. The MBT clinician is striving to keep a constant
dialectic between the formulation co-constructed with the patient and the additional
information gradually acquired through the clinical process, which provides evidence for
confirmation and also updating of the formulation. Starting from the idiosyncratic
triggers of core self-disturbances that were initially identified (see Figure 10.3 ), as well
as the mentalizing impairments that were characterized at the beginning of the treatment
(point 1 in Figure 10.3 ), the clinician will detect non-mentalizing modes when the patient
is increasingly unable to appreciate alternative perspectives. These breakdowns in men-
talizing are met by the clinician, who will —in line with the MBT principle of openness of
mind states —strive to make their own thought process explicit when this is relevant to
the therapy process, and validate the patient ’s experience while marking the existence of
alternative perspectives (points 2 and 3 in Figure 10.3 ).Box 10.3 Key points about the mentalizing process.
/C15Use mediation tools and playfulness.
/C15Make the clinician ’s own thought process explicit.
/C15Make the clinician ’s own thought process genuine and simple.
/C15Model the links between non-verbal communication and thought process.Psychosis 271
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Clinical Example: Johanna
JOHANNA :Everyone on the bus was looking at me as if I was crazy. I had to get off and walk here.
CLINICIAN :That sounds like a terrible experience, to feel everyone looking at you like that. Did
walking here help with that feeling?
JOHANNA :Kind of ...
CLINICIAN :I see. Is it possible that you think we have these same thoughts here?
JOHANNA :Yes ...
CLINICIAN :Well, thanks for sharing this, Johanna, I realize that must not be easy for you at the
moment. I just want to tell you that as far as I can tell what I ’m thinking, I ’m currently focused on
understanding how that feels for you, and I ’m not really thinking —again, as far as I can tell from
my thoughts ...I mean ...thinking that you are crazy is not a thought that crossed my mind.
JOHANNA :It feels like you are ...it’s just that I would like these thoughts to stop burdening me.
CLINICIAN :And we are very motivated to try to help you with this burden ...
In gradually shifting the focus from the content of delusional thoughts to their effects,
the clinician tries to avoid complicated or hyper-symbolic thought (point 4 in
Figure 10.3 ), as this can lead the patient to increasingly experience verbal content as
unreal. At times, non-mentalizing may be so unbearable for patients that they retreat
into their own subjective perspective and demonstrate maintenance or exacerbation of
their symptom manifestation. This will signal to the clinician that they need to intervene
by providing non-threatening feedback, explore the options for containing potentially
disruptive behaviors in safe environments, and chart symptom development as agreed in
the formulation and crisis plan (points 5 and 6 in Figure 10.3 ).
A summary of key points about the clinical approach to non-mentalizing modes is
given in Box 10.4 .Identify idiosyncratic
triggers
1. Characterize
impairments
3. Validate while also
offering a non-threatening
alternative perspective2. Make thought
process explicit5. Contain retreat
behavior with
secure environment
4. Avoid complicated
mental-state/
hyper-symbolic talk6. Provide non-threatening
feedback; monitor
symptom change
Fig. 10.3 Framework and guiding principles for clinical intervention in non-mentalizing following core
self-disturbance.272 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Affective Narrative
In MBT for psychosis, intervening in the affective narrative carries the risk of hyper-
reflectivity. To safeguard against this risk, the clinician is advised to have a clear focus in
the formulation to provide a framework for working in the affective narrative.
Furthermore, the level of mentalizing of the patient, as understood in the initial assess-
ments, points the clinician toward the use of interventions that are likely to support the
integration of previously disintegrative experiences. In other words, employing mental-
izing functional analysis (see Chapter 4 ) and proceeding with frame-by-frame descrip-
tions of episodes may be particularly useful in helping the patient to integrate the
different extremes of experience in their daily life.
Generally speaking, the “elephant in the room ”(see Chapter 4 ) for patients with
psychosis concerns both self and others. As a reminder, the elephant in the room is the
subdominant affective narrative that tends to interfere with the interaction between patient
and clinician. Patients often experience a profound distrust in their own capacity to
tolerate stress, limit their expectations within relationships, fail to rely on reciprocity,
and, most importantly, fail to recognize inconsistency in their relationship with them-
selves. This is based on their own experience of themselves, their diminished self-affection
and lack of self-compassion, and their hyper-reflectivity, all of which they understand
others find difficult to tolerate. Both patient and clinician begin to “live”this agreed
narrative implicitly without verbalizing the effects that it may be having on therapy and
the patient ’s life. In this sense, narrative work about the patient ’s life seeks to increase felt
agency both in therapy and in their daily life; the evidence suggests that improvements can
be achieved when working on narratives [ 44]. The other “elephant in the room ”is oriented
toward the reliability of others and also the nature of their intentions, which tend to be
perceived as hostile. In contrast to patients with BPD, in patients with psychosis the nature
of distrust in others is related not to abandonment, but rather to perceived intentions of
others to alienate the patient. This theme often pervades the patient ’s relationship with
their psychiatrist regarding medication, or with their keyworker regarding housing and
occupational issues. The self/other and cognitive/affective dimensions of mentalizing are
thus central to the kind of integrative work that can be done in MBT for psychosis.
A summary of key points about the affective narrative is given in Box 10.5 .Box 10.4 Key points for non-mentalizing modes.
/C15Track idiosyncratic triggers for the emergence of non-mentalizing modes.
/C15Validate and empathize with the patient ’s experience, while maintaining a
mentalizing stance.
/C15Avoid complicated mentalizing.
/C15If psychosis takes over, follow the crisis plan.
Box 10.5 Key points about working with the affective narrative.
/C15Embed work on narrative in the formulation.
/C15Target integration between the dimensions of mentalizing.
/C15Maintain awareness of the patient ’s distrust of self.
/C15Maintain awareness of the patient ’s distrust of others.Psychosis 273
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Mentalizing the Relationship
Similar to work in the affective narrative domain, working on the relationship in MBT for
psychosis risks triggering disturbances in the patient ’s core self. To safeguard against this
risk, the clinician offers psychoeducation on using relationships to foster self and other
awareness, and links feelings and mental states from the lived experience within the
relationships between patients in the groups and the relationship(s) to the clinician(s).
The safest way to intervene is to work inthe relationship, rather than on representa-
tions of the relationship. Again, embedding interventions in the relationship by marking
and modeling explicit mentalizing of the clinician ’s own thought processes is useful for
maintaining the individual therapy as a safe place in the context of group work.
Interventions in the relationship between the clinician and the patient may be necessary
in order to address issues of trust and safety, as well as when impasses in treatment are
encountered. Again, self-regulation of the clinician is key in such interventions, as
patients with psychosis —contrary to popular belief —can be exquisitely sensitive to
changes in arousal in other people [ 45].
Concluding Remarks
This chapter has combined empirical and clinical knowledge gained from contemporary
psychotherapy for psychosis as informed by MBT, and has delineated a framework
encompassing a clinical rationale, key reference points for treatment, and the domains
of intervention in MBT for psychosis. The available evidence suggests that further
research on psychotherapy process and technical adaptations, along with better articula-
tion of interventions within multidisciplinary settings, is required in order to sustain
growth and meaningful recovery for patients with psychosis. The mentalizing theoretical
framework and MBT clinical framework add to the conceptualization and interventions
that can address general psychopathology in psychosis, and can also help the patient and
the clinician to maintain mentalizing in the face of unpredictable and often frightening
psychotic experiences. The domains of MBT intervention are followed in the treatment
for psychosis, with key adaptations being made to the mentalizing process and
treatment structure.
References
1. American Psychiatric Association.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders , 5th ed. Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Association,
2013.
2. Brent B. Mentalization-based
psychodynamic psychotherapy for
psychosis. J Clin Psychol 2009; 65: 803 –14.
3. Debbané M, Benmiloud J, Salaminios G
et al. Mentalization-based treatment in
clinical high-risk for psychosis: a rationale
and clinical illustration. J Contemp
Psychother 2016; 46: 217 –25.4. Lana F, Marcos S, Mollà L et al.
Mentalization based group psychotherapy
for psychosis: a pilot study to assess
safety, acceptance and subjective efficacy.
Int J Psychol Psychoanal 2015; 1:
1–6.
5. Weijers J, Ten Kate C, Eurelings-
Bontekoe E et al. Mentalization-based
treatment for psychotic disorder: protocol
of a randomized controlled trial. BMC
Psychiatry 2016; 16: 191.
6. Lana F, Marti-Bonany J, Sanz-Correcher
P et al. Brief day hospital mentalization
based group psychotherapy for
schizophrenia spectrum disorders: a274 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
feasibility study. Actas Esp Psiquiatr 2020;
48:6 4–74.
7. Riddel K, Clouse M. Program
development meets theory development:
MBGT-I for schizophrenia spectrum and
other psychotic disorders. Clin Schizophr
Relat Psychoses 2020; 14:3 9–44.
8. Brent B, Fonagy P. A mentalization-based
treatment approach to disturbances of
social understanding in schizophrenia. In:
Lysaker PH, Dimaggio G, Brüne M, eds.
Social Cognition and Metacognition in
Schizophrenia . San Diego, CA: Elsevier,
2014; 245 –57.
9. Debbané M, Salaminios G, Luyten P et al.
Attachment, neurobiology, and
mentalizing along the psychosis
continuum. Front Hum Neurosci 2016;
10: 406.
10. Weijers JG, ten Kate C, Debbane M et al.
Mentalization and psychosis: a rationale
for the use of mentalization theory to
understand and treat non-affective
psychotic disorder. J Contemp Psychother
2020; 50: 223 –32.
11. Debbané M, Bateman A. Psychosis. In:
Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds. Handbook of
Mentalizing in Mental Health Practice ,
2nd ed. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association Publishing, 2019;
443–58.
12. Armando M, Hutsebaut J, Debbane M.
A mentalization-informed staging
approach to clinical high risk for
psychosis. Front Psychiatry 2019; 10: 385.
13. Rapoport JL, Addington AM, Frangou S,
Psych MR. The neurodevelopmental
model of schizophrenia: update 2005. Mol
Psychiatry 2005; 10: 434 –49.
14. Lichtenstein P, Yip BH, Bjork C et al.
Common genetic determinants of
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder in
Swedish families: a population-based
study. Lancet 2009; 373: 234 –9.
15. Meehl PE. Toward an integrated theory of
schizotaxia, schizotypy, and
schizophrenia. J Pers Disord 1990; 4:
1–99.
16. Debbané M, Barrantes-Vidal N.
Schizotypy from a developmentalperspective. Schizophr Bull 2015; 41
(Suppl. 2): S386 –95.
17. Debbané M. Schizotypy: a developmental
perspective. In: Mason O, Claridge G, eds.
Schizotypy: New Dimensions . Abingdon,
UK: Routledge, 2015; 83 –98.
18. Lenzenweger MF. Schizotypy: an
organizing framework for schizophrenia
research. Curr Dir Psychol Sci 2016; 15:
162–6.
19. Guloksuz S, Pries LK, Ten Have M et al.
Association of preceding psychosis risk
states and non-psychotic mental disorders
with incidence of clinical psychosis in the
general population: a prospective study in
the NEMESIS-2 cohort. World Psychiatry
2020; 19: 199 –205.
20. Schultze-Lutter F, Michel C, Schmidt SJ
et al. EPA guidance on the early detection
of clinical high risk states of psychoses.
Eur Psychiatry 2015; 30: 405 –16.
21. Schultze-Lutter F, Ruhrmann S, Berning J
et al. Basic symptoms and ultrahigh risk
criteria: symptom development in the
initial prodromal state. Schizophr Bull
2010; 36: 182 –91.
22. Alvarez-Jimenez M, Gleeson JF, Henry LP
et al. Road to full recovery: longitudinal
relationship between symptomatic
remission and psychosocial recovery in
first-episode psychosis over 7.5 years.
Psychol Med 2012; 42: 595 –606.
23. AlAqeel B, Margolese HC. Remission in
schizophrenia: critical and systematic
review. Harv Rev Psychiatry 2012; 20:
281–97.
24. Bevington D, Fuggle P, Cracknell L,
Fonagy P. Adaptive Mentalization-Based
Integrative Treatment: A Guide for Teams
to Develop Systems of Care . Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2017.
25. Boyette LL, Korver-Nieberg N, Meijer C
et al. Quality of life in patients with
psychotic disorders: impact of symptoms,
personality, and attachment. J Nerv Ment
Dis2014; 202:6 4–9.
26. Nevarez-Flores AG, Sanderson K, Breslin
M et al. Systematic review of global
functioning and quality of life in peoplePsychosis 275
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
with psychotic disorders. Epidemiol
Psychiatr Sci 2019; 28:3 1–44.
27. Jones K. Addressing the needs of carers
during early psychosis. Early Interv
Psychiatry 2009; 3(Suppl. 1): S22 –6.
28. Harley EW, Boardman J, Craig T.
Friendship in people with schizophrenia:
a survey. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr
Epidemiol 2012; 47: 1291 –9.
29. Castelein S, Bruggeman R, van
Busschbach JT et al. The effectiveness of
peer support groups in psychosis: a
randomized controlled trial. Acta
Psychiatr Scand 2008; 118:6 4–72.
30. Weijers J. Mentalization and Psychosis:
Trying to Understand the Un-
Understandable . Maastricht: Ridderprint,
2020.
31. Bleuler E. Dementia Praecox or the Group
of Schizophrenias . New York:
International Universities Press, 1911/
1950.
32. Freud S. Three essays on the theory of
sexuality. In: Strachey J, ed. The Standard
Edition of the Complete Psychological
Works of Sigmund Freud , Vol. 7. London,
UK: Hogarth Press, 1905/1953; 123 –230.
33. Freud S. On narcissism. In: Strachey J, ed.
The Standard Edition of the Complete
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud ,
Vol. 14. London, UK: Hogarth Press,
1914/1957; 67 –102.
34. Freud S. The unconscious. In: Strachey J,
ed.The Standard Edition of the Complete
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud ,
Vol. 14. London, UK: Hogarth Press,
1915/1957; 159 –216.
35. Sass LA, Parnas J. Schizophrenia,
consciousness, and the self. Schizophr Bull
2003; 29: 427 –44.
36. Auerbach JS, Blatt SJ. Self-representation
in severe psychopathology: the role of
reflexive self-awareness. Psychoanal
Psychol 1996; 13: 297 –341.37. Lysaker PH, Buck KD, Pattison ML et al.
Supervision in the psychotherapy of
schizophrenia: awareness of and mutual
reflection upon fragmentation. Am
J Psychoanal 2019; 79: 284 –303.
38. Adams RA, Stephan KE, Brown HR et al.
The computational anatomy of psychosis.
Front Psychiatry 2013; 4: 47.
39. Friston K. Active inference and free
energy. Behav Brain Sci 2013; 36:
212–13.
40. Derome M, Fonseca-Pedrero E, Badoud
D et al. Resting-state networks of
adolescents experiencing
depersonalization-like illusions: cross-
sectional and longitudinal findings.
Schizophr Bull 2018; 44(Suppl. 2):
S501 –11.
41. Frith CD. The Cognitive Neuropsychology
of Schizophrenia . Hove, UK: Psychology
Press, 1992.
42. Salaminios G, Debbané M.
A mentalization-based treatment
framework to support the recovery of the
self in emerging psychosis during
adolescence. In: Hasson-Ohayion I,
Lysaker PH, eds. The Recovery of the Self
in Psychosis . Abingdon, UK: Routledge,
2021; 12 –35.
43. Byrne G, Sleed M, Midgley N et al.
Lighthouse Parenting Programme:
description and pilot evaluation of
mentalization-based treatment to address
child maltreatment. Clin Child Psychol
Psychiatry 2019; 24: 680 –93.
44. Lysaker PH, Klion RE. Recovery,
Meaning-Making, and Severe Mental
Illness: A Comprehensive Guide to
Metacognitive Reflection and Insight
Therapy . New York, NY: Routledge, 2017.
45. Reininghaus U, Kempton MJ, Valmaggia
L et al. Stress sensitivity, aberrant salience,
and threat anticipation in early psychosis:
an experience sampling study. Schizophr
Bull 2016; 42: 712 –22.276 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part III
Chapter
11Application and Adaptations for Mental Health
Presentations
Trauma
Introduction
Clinical Example: Lydia
Lydia is a 25-year-old nurse. At the start of her intake interview with a clinician she
immediately starts to cry, and she says she does not know how to begin to relate what
is wrong with her. She says that she always seems to end up in abusive relationships
characterized by emotional and often physical abuse. She does not understand why she
seems to be attracted to such abusive men, as she herself was emotionally neglected by
her parents, and as a result would like nothing more than to be in a loving relationship. She
has two young daughters, but child protection services have recently threatened to
remove her children because of concerns about neglect and abuse.
Lydia describes her parents as very hard-working but emotionally distant. Although she
says she never doubted that they loved her, she cannot remember either her mum or her dad
ever telling her that they did so. She has a younger brother who she says is a lot like her; he was
also frequently humiliated by their parents, particularly by their mother, and, like Lydia, he
came to believe that there was something fundamentally wrong with him. A few years ago, he
moved abroad in an attempt to escape from his parents. Lydia also thought about moving
away, but she still visits her parents: “My mum is still my mum, despite everything she has done to
me.”As a teenager, Lydia began to experiment with drugs “to ease my pain ,”and she also
began to self-harm by cutting her arms and wrists, which provided her “with a sense of
importance and excitement .”She successfully completed her training as a nurse. However, at
work she is often involved in conflicts with her co-workers, and it is clear to her that “they
simply cannot stand me, I can tell by the way they look at me that they all think I am a worthless
piece of junk who even mistreats her children ,”and although she wanted to become a nurse
because she “has always liked to care for people ,”she says that recently she has felt that she no
longer cares about her patients. She says she feels utterly depressed, often anxious, is addicted
to alcohol, and still self-harms frequently. In her referral letter, her treating psychiatrist refers
her for the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder, and adds that there is also evidence for
borderline personality disorder as well as antisocial features.
Lydia ’s problems are typical of many patients who present with so-called attachment
trauma orcomplex trauma . The term “complex trauma ”refers to the impact of pro-
longed early negative life experiences involving neglect and/or abuse, typically within an
attachment/caregiving context, in which the caregivers who are supposed to protect and
care for the child are at the same time a source of anxiety, threat, neglect, and/or abuse
[1,2]. The co-occurrence of mental disorders in patients like Lydia is common —in fact, it
is the rule rather than the exception. Research studies have shown that trauma is best
277
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
considered as a transdiagnostic factor that is implicated in the development of a wide
variety of emotional and (functional) somatic disorders. Trauma typically accounts for
between 30% and 70% of the population attributable risk for a wide range of mental
disorders [ 3,4]. Furthermore, it can generate an ecophenotype (a group of characteristics
that emerge as an adaptation to the environment) that is associated not only with high
rates of comorbidity (i.e., the co-occurrence of two or more mental disorders) but also
with an earlier age of onset of psychopathology, greater severity of symptoms, an
increased risk for suicide, and a poorer response to treatment [ 3].
This chapter will discuss the mentalizing approach to trauma [ 5–11], beginning with
an outline of how to conceptualize trauma and its impact from a mentalizing perspective,
and focusing on the effect of trauma on four basic biobehavioral systems (i.e., inter-
connected biological and psychological processes) that play a key role in emotion
regulation —the stress ,attachment ,mentalizing , and epistemic trust systems [ 12].
Treatment principles will then be discussed, with a focus on adaptations of the basic
mentalization-based treatment (MBT) model to make it more suitable for addressing the
problems of people with a history of trauma. Finally, MBT-Trauma Focused (MBT-TF),
a specific, modular program of group sessions with some individual sessions for patients
with a trauma history, will be described.
Understanding Trauma: A Mentalizing Perspective
There are different types of trauma, which can be thought of as a continuum ranging
from impersonal trauma (e.g., living through a natural disaster, being involved in a
serious car crash) to interpersonal trauma (e.g., being abused by a work colleague or a
stranger) and on to attachment trauma orcomplex trauma (e.g., being abused by a parent
or other attachment figure). This continuum is depicted in Figure 11.1 .
Clinically, it is important to realize that the typical response of an individual to a
single isolated experience of trauma is so-called minimal impact resilience . Many people
experience only temporary distress after a single incident of (impersonal or interper-
sonal) trauma and then show a relatively quick improvement back to healthy function-
ing, although sometimes this can take longer. Research suggests that only a subgroup of
individuals develops chronic trauma-related problems as a result of experiencing or
witnessing a single incident of trauma [ 13,14]. From a mentalizing perspective, these
findings force us to reverse the traditional perspective on trauma, in that the essence of
understanding the impact of trauma lies not in the idea of vulnerability, but in the
absence of resilience . For example, people who experience a long-term period of distress
Impersonal
traumaAttachment
traumaInterpersonal
trauma
Attachment
figureHuman
agentNon-human
agentFig. 11.1 The different types of trauma
(adapted from Allen [ 7]).278 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
and maladaptation after experiencing a single traumatic event tend to have a history of
early childhood trauma and/or poor social support and emotion-regulation strategies
[15,16].
To explain these findings from a mentalizing perspective, trauma is thought to
disrupt the coordinated functioning of four closely related biobehavioral systems (see
Table 11.1 ). Disruptions in the coordinated functioning of these systems also provide a
comprehensive theoretical framework for understanding the main clinical features of
patients with a history of trauma, in particular attachment trauma (see Table 11.2 and
Figures 11.2 and11.3).
Trauma —regardless of whether it is single or complex —typically challenges the
stress-regulation system. This leads to an often massive activation of the attachment
system in an attempt to co-regulate stress and arousal (see Figure 11.3 ). As will be
discussed in more detail later in this chapter, attachment figures play a key role in the co-
regulation of stress —when someone is faced with trauma or adversity, they seek help,
support, and care from those closest to them. However, when (co-)regulation fails, a state
of hyperarousal and associated hypervigilance to threat (which is typical of trauma
syndromes) arises. Because of this state of hyperarousal, mentalizing impairments are
often inevitable. They give rise to distorted views of self and others, and also increase the
risk of intrusions (i.e., re-experiencing of trauma) and the use of avoidance behaviors
and dissociation to defend against unbearable feelings of anxiety, anger, shame, guilt,
disgust, and dread. For individuals with attachment trauma in particular, these unbear-
able states of mind also increase the risk of further trauma related to continuing
problematic interactions with others triggered by traumatic memories (re-enactments).
Many of these individuals have also developed high levels of epistemic mistrust and
epistemic hypervigilance (see Chapter 2 ) as an adaptation strategy to an environmentTable 11.1 A mentalizing approach to trauma
Biobehavioral system
affected by traumaEffects of disruption of system
Stress system Temporary or chronic dysregulation of the stress system,
leading to hyperarousal
Attachment behavioral
systemIncreased reliance on secondary attachment strategies; risk of
increased dysregulation of the stress response, leading to a
sense of isolation, abandonment, and/or neglect
Mentalizing capacity Non-mentalizing modes tend to dominate subjective
experience; this leads to feelings of hopelessness and dread
(psychic equivalence), increases the risk of self-harm
(teleological mode), and/or results in rumination and
dissociation (pretend mode), combined with a pressure to
externalize unmentalized experiences ( “alien self ”states), and
re-enactment of traumatic experiences
Capacity for epistemic trust Epistemic trust is weakened, leading to impaired social
communication and salutogenesis. The inability to recalibrate
the mind together with a trusted other increases the feelings of
isolation and dreadTrauma 279
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Table 11.2 Typical features of trauma, their clinical expression, and the underlying biobehavioral systems
that are involved
Trauma features Clinical expression Underlying
biobehavioral
system(s)
Hyperarousal and reactivity /C15Hypervigilance/anxiety
/C15Heightened startle response
/C15Concentration problems
/C15Sleep problems
/C15Irritability or aggression
/C15Physical symptomsStress and
attachment
systems
Intrusions/re-experiencing and
associated avoidance behaviors
and dissociative experiences/C15Unwanted negative
memories
/C15Nightmares
/C15Flashbacks
/C15Emotional distress
/C15DissociationMentalizing
system
Negative views of self and others /C15Overly negative assumptions
about oneself, others, and/or
the world in general
/C15Exaggerated blame of self or
others/(survivor) guilt
/C15Depressive feelings
/C15Difficulty experiencing
positive affect
/C15Feelings of isolation
/C15Feelings of (toxic) shame
and/or disgustMentalizing and
epistemic trust
systems
Re-enactments /C15Risky or (self-)destructive
behavior
/C15Re-enactment of neglect
or abuseAttachment,
mentalizing,
epistemic trust
systems
Re-enactments
PTSD symptoms
Negative self–other
representations(Self-)harming
behaviorsTrauma triggersFig. 11.2 Re-enactment
cycles associated with
(complex) trauma and post-
traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD).280 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
characterized by abuse and/or neglect. MBT may therefore be particularly appropriate
and effective for patients with complex trauma because of its focus both on restoring the
process of mentalizing and on the dynamics associated with severe impairments in
mentalizing (i.e., the tendency for re-enactments or externalization of unmentalized
experiences in relationships, including the therapeutic relationship) and epistemic mis-
trust. Victims of trauma often show a tendency to unwittingly recreate experiences of
neglect and abuse, and tend not to trust other people. These tendencies often seriously
compromise the capacity of these individuals to establish a working therapeutic alliance,
and as a result there is a high likelihood of dropout from treatment and frequent relapses.
Trauma, Stress, and Attachment
Trauma activates the stress/threat system. In human beings the stress/threat system
consists of a distributed set of neural structures —the amygdala, hippocampus, and areas
in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), including the medial PFC [ 17,18]—and a broader set of
associated regulatory responses, including responses coordinated by the hypothalamic –
pituitary –adrenal (HPA) axis and the autonomic nervous system, the metabolic system,
the gut, the kidneys, and the immune system, each of which has relatively distinctPotentially traumatic
event
Stress dysregulation
Over-reliance on
secondary attachment
strategies
Hyperarousal
Mentalizing
impairmentsNegative self–other
representationsAvoidance
acting outEpistemic vigilanceLack of salutogenesis
Fig. 11.3 Trauma features and underlying biobehavioral systems.Trauma 281
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
biomediators (e.g., cortisol, sympathetic and parasympathetic neurotransmitters, meta-
bolic hormones, cytokines) [ 17–19]. This coordinated set of responses underlies so-called
fight/flight/freeze responses when the individual is faced with stress.
The quality of a person ’s attachment relationships and their social environment more
generally play a pivotal role in the stress response, and continue to play this role
throughout development [ 19,20]. From a developmental perspective, secure attachment
is conducive to so-called adaptive hyporesponsivity of the stress system in response to
adversity. This means that children who grow up in a secure attachment context tend to
develop the capacity to cope with adversity because they learn that others are there to
help and support them. Hence, for these individuals, the primary attachment strategy in
times of need is to seek help, advice, care, and support from others, which leads to a
down-regulation of feelings of distress and fear, underpinned by the neurobiological
mesocorticolimbic reward system [ 21]. This sequence of events typically leads to what
have been called “broaden-and-build cycles ”[22,23], in which the individual learns that
they can reach out to others in times of need (i.e., “broaden ”), and also develops a belief
in their capacity to deal with stress and adversity (i.e., “build ”).
By contrast, high levels of adversity, particularly during critical periods in the
development of the stress system (which in humans extends into early adulthood), are
associated with disruption of the stress response, expressed in either overactivity of the
HPA axis (i.e., a constant state of fight/flight) or HPA hypo(re)activity (i.e., a “freeze/
faint ”state; [ 18,24]). When attachment strategies fail, either because of chronic stress or
due to the (perceived) unavailability of attachment figures, individuals begin to rely
excessively on secondary attachment strategies . These are attachment-hyperactivating or
attachment-deactivating strategies, or a combination of both, which is typical of individ-
uals with disorganized attachment and/or a history of complex trauma. Attachment-
deactivating strategies are a typical response to the (perceived) unavailability of attach-
ment figures, whereas attachment-hyperactivating strategies develop as an attempt to
elicit care and support from attachment figures who are inconsistently available.
Individuals with a history of complex trauma often have childhood attachment figures
who were a source of security, support, love, and care, but also of abuse and neglect.
Children who grow up in this situation are often caught in an approach –avoidance
conflict, which is then reactivated and re-enacted when they become involved in similar
relationships later in life —that is, relationships characterized by love and care on the one
hand, and abuse and/or neglect on the other —because this is the attachment “template ”
that is familiar to them (see Table 11.3 ).
Regardless of the type of secondary attachment strategy that is used to deal with
increasing stress and adversity, these strategies tend to fail in the longer term, as they are
based on an underlying belief that others are ultimately not available to provide care and
support. As a result, the effective (co-)regulation of stress fails, leading to a state of
hyperarousal characterized by hypervigilance to threat, a heightened startle reaction,
cognitive problems (e.g., difficulty concentrating), sleeping problems, and often high
levels of irritability and aggression (as listed in Table 11.2 ). The individual continues to
function in a fight/flight state. This also allows us to understand the often long-lasting
consequences of attachment trauma for physical health, because of its impact on the
neurotransmitter systems, pain-processing systems, and immune system. This is the
reason for the high comorbidity between trauma, somatic disorders, and functional
somatic disorders, including chronic pain and fatigue conditions [ 25]. Trauma is282 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
associated not only with high “psychological costs ”but also with high “metabolic costs, ”
because chronic stress causes wear and tear on the neurobiological systems that are
involved in the stress response. In addition, unhealthy behaviors (e.g., excessive drinking,
overeating, smoking) are often used as a coping strategy for dealing with traumatic
feelings, which further increases the risk of certain physical conditions, such as cardio-
vascular disease, diabetes, and obesity.
Trauma and Mentalizing
The high levels of arousal that result from a breakdown in normal (co-)regulation of
stress also compromise the individual ’s capacity for controlled mentalizing. Studies have
shown an inverse relationship between arousal and the capacity to mentalize [ 26,27].
With increasing arousal, defensive (fight/flight/freeze) and often biased automatic men-
talizing comes online. This switch from more controlled to automatic mentalizing has
obvious adaptive value from an evolutionary perspective, as it allows a rapid response to
threat ( “I am in danger, I can ’t trust anyone, and I need to defend myself ”). However, in
the longer term, automatic biased mentalizing characteristically leads to overly negative
views about the self and others ( “I am worthless, ”“I am unlovable, ”“You can never trust
others ”) (see Table 11.2 andFigure 11.3 ). Moreover, in psychic equivalence mode (see
later in this section, and Chapter 2 ), trauma triggers lead the individual to re-experience
memories of the trauma as if they are real and the traumatic situation is actually re-
occurring. This leads to further anxiety, distress, feelings of depression, and defensive
avoidance of trauma triggers, often resulting in dissociation and acting-out behaviors in
an attempt to down-regulate these highly distressing feelings. Because traumatic experi-
ences are unmentalized, they remain unbearable for the trauma victim, who is thus
prone to externalization and acting out, as is shown by the high incidence of (self-)
destructive behaviors (discussed in more detail later) and nightmares and flashbacks (see
Table 11.2 and Figure 11.3 ). Trauma impairs the capacity to frame and reframeTable 11.3 Types of re-enactment associated with (attachment) trauma
Type of re-enactment Typical features
Revictimization The individual unwittingly seeks out relationships
characterized by physical, emotional, and/or
sexual abuse, often also involving rejection,
abandonment and/or perceived neglect. This
may lead them to become aggressive
Re-enactment of neglect The individual is hypersensitive to any signs of
neglect, and constantly tends to construe
interpersonal situations in terms of neglect; again,
this may lead to aggression (out of a sense of
righteous indignation) and/or they may become
even more convinced that others are neglectful
Re-enactment of attachment trauma/
childhood maltreatment in parenting
behaviorEmotional states in the individual ’s child trigger
unmentalized mental states related to the
individual ’s own traumatic history, and these are
acted out in relation to the childTrauma 283
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
overwhelming experiences. Individuals with insecure attachment histories in particular
have less and sometimes no access to relational referencing or the recalibration of their
mind —the process by which a person can meaningfully reframe traumatic experiences
and begin to mentalize what could not be mentalized before. Strong feelings of anger and
disgust, and high levels of shame (also called toxic shame), further prevent relational
referencing, which means that traumatic memories maintain their original destructive
impact on the individual and their attachment and mentalizing capacities.
Therefore, as will be described in more detail later, the importance of relational
referencing is particularly emphasized in the MBT approach to trauma. Despite their
attempts to avoid traumatic experiences, individuals with a history of trauma still
experience a particular need for marked mirroring of these experiences, which involves
someone else reflecting back in a marked (i.e., digested and contained) way what is
difficult or even impossible for the individual to mentalize. Marked mirroring in this
case involves empathic, validating, and normalizing interventions that gradually modu-
late the traumatic experience of the patient in such a way that they become able to think
and feel what they previously were unable to think and feel, leading to mentalized
affectivity —the capacity to feel and to simultaneously reflect upon one ’s feelings [ 28,29].
As in all types of MBT, the starting point of such interventions is often when the
trauma patient loses the capacity for mentalizing and begins to rely on non-mentalizing
modes of experiencing reality, frequently associated with a tendency to externalize
unmentalized experiences, leading to cycles of re-enactment.
In psychic equivalence mode, everything becomes too real, and talking about the
trauma leads the person to relive it. The traumatized individual feels stuck in the painful
past and present, and for them there is no hope and no way out. These painful feelings,
which are often merged with highly “toxic ”feelings of shame, often give rise to teleo-
logical-mode functioning, in which the person feels that only actions can bring relief.
This typically leads to self-harming behaviors (e.g., excessive drinking, self-cutting,
overactivity) in an attempt to regulate extremely painful feelings. Pretend-mode func-
tioning in individuals with trauma is often expressed through excessive rumination
about past events, in combination with intrusive thoughts, in which the person loses
contact with reality. This may lead to dissociative states as an attempt to protect the self
against feelings of inner emptiness, badness, or worthlessness.
In these circumstances, re-enactment cycles are particularly likely to occur.
Therapeutic work focusing on these cycles is a prominent feature in MBT for trauma
(seeTable 11.3 andFigure 11.3 ). Such re-enactments are made all the more likely as the
therapist ’s mind, in interacting with the traumatized individual, tends to freeze as well,
which could be thought of as “vicarious traumatization. ”This only increases the trauma-
tized person ’s painful feelings of being isolated and beyond help, which leads them to
become more prone to acting out unmentalized traumatic experiences.
Attachment experiences provide a template for later relationships, and individuals
with a history of complex trauma have often developed strong, albeit destructive,
templates for relationships in which love and care are inevitably linked to abuse and/
or neglect. The first type of re-enactment cycle shown in Table 11.3 is well known and
involves revictimization [ 30,31]. Being in an abusive relationship as a child not only
creates considerable anxiety and distress, but also intensifies attachment needs, as the
attachment system is activated as a response to threat. This paradoxically strengthens the
child ’s relationship with an abusive attachment figure, particularly if that abusive figure284 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
is also a source of comfort, support, and/or love. This pattern is then repeated in
relationships in later life —for example, in romantic relationships with a jealous, posses-
sive, and abusive partner [ 32]—continuing a disorganized/disoriented attachment pat-
tern [ 33]. In teleological mode, the individual may engage in self-harm, which may lead
to a vicious cycle in which others increasingly feel that they have to distance themselves
from the individual (because they feel more and more “traumatized ”), confirming the
traumatized individual ’s worst fear —that others are unavailable to them. A state of
righteous indignation may arise as the traumatized individual feels that they have every
reason to retaliate because of the abusive behavior of others [ 34]. As aggression typically
helps to achieve a sense of coherence, protecting the individual against painful feelings,
such vindictive/aggressive states of mind may be very persistent. As a result, as in the
case of Lydia described at the beginning of this chapter, these individuals often become
“addicted ”to others who are (perceived as) abusive, as this allows them to establish and
maintain a certain level of stability, however precarious it may be.
The second type of re-enactment cycle (see Table 11.3 ), namely re-enactment of
neglect, may occur in individuals with a history of neglect. Here even minor misunder-
standings or disagreements can lead to often extreme dysphoria and/or aggressive or self-
harming behavior, and similar re-enactments when the individual is in teleological mode
(e.g., accusing a senior colleague, romantic partner, or organization of neglect).
In the third type of re-enactment cycle (see Table 11.3 ), in the context of parenting,
observing emotional distress or happiness in their children may trigger these individuals ’
own past traumatic experiences of neglect and/or abuse. For instance, Lydia acted out her
unmentalized experiences involving envy and anger, repeating the traumatic behavior of
her parents in relation to her own children.
Problems with Epistemic Trust
Trauma and adversity are characteristically part of a broader “risky environment ”in
which individuals grow up [ 35]. Hence, in trying to understand resilience in the face of
adversity, a systemic perspective is essential. Many people who have experienced trauma
(especially complex/attachment trauma) often show profound epistemic mistrust and
epistemic hypervigilance; this may have arisen either as a chronic trait or as a conse-
quence of unhelpful interactions with healthcare professionals, or a combination of both.
Epistemic mistrust/hypervigilance is an understandable adaptation strategy for individ-
uals who have grown up experiencing abuse or neglect. However, in adopting this
strategy, they also close themselves off from the possibility of social recalibration of
their mind and hence salutogenesis —that is, the capacity of an individual to benefit from
positive social influences in their environment [ 12,36].
Attachment trauma in particular leads the patient to feel unrecognized as an inde-
pendent agent. They often lack experiences of marked mirroring by attachment figures
that would typically give rise to a feeling of agency and autonomy, which opens up what
we think of as an “epistemic superhighway ”that allows the fast communication of
knowledge about the self, others, and the world. Hence, as will be discussed in more
detail later, a central task in MBT for trauma is to recover (or develop, depending on the
severity of epistemic vigilance) the patient ’s capacity for epistemic trust. For many
patients who have a history of attachment trauma, even thinking about the minds of
other people and their intentions will lead them to re-experience the trauma, and it isTrauma 285
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
understandable that this might be defensively blocked. This makes these individuals
particularly “hard to reach ”via therapeutic interventions. In the case of Lydia, for
instance, it took a long time before she was willing to even consider the idea that her
mother might not have been the good mother that Lydia thought (wished) she was.
Mentalization-Based Treatment for Trauma
People with a history of attachment trauma are often less responsive to psychotherapy
than those who have not experienced trauma [ 3,12]. As a result, a number of treatments
specifically focusing on trauma have been developed. MBT has shown considerable
effectiveness in treating disorders that are characterized by high levels of (complex)
trauma, such as borderline personality disorder [ 37] and antisocial personality disorder
[38]. A recent study also found that trauma had little or no impact on treatment outcome
in two types of MBT for borderline personality disorder (intensive outpatient MBT and
day-hospitalization MBT) [ 39]. These findings open up promising perspectives for the
treatment of patients with trauma, although we believe, as we shall describe later in this
chapter, that more focused trauma work may improve the effectiveness of MBT for
trauma even further.
General Principles of MBT for Trauma
The MBT approach to trauma is based on five related general principles that are elements
of all types of MBT, but deserve greater attention in the treatment of these patients.
First, a structured treatment approach that is coherent, consistent, and continuous over
time is crucially important in the treatment of patients with trauma, particularly those with
attachment trauma, as these characteristics of the treatment will help to structure the
patients ’sense of self and others. An environment that has high levels of predictability and
reliability is a key requirement. For the same reason, psychoeducation about trauma and
its impact on psychological functioning, as well as about the MBT program itself, is an
important component of MBT for trauma, as it not only scaffolds the mentalizing
capacities of traumatized individuals but also further increases the predictability of treat-
ment and decreases the patients ’feelings of epistemic mistrust, as the MBT clinician (or
service) is open and explicit about the treatment and what it involves.
Second, it is essential to provide a physically and psychologically safe and containing
holding environment to help the patient to develop a trusting relationship with the
clinician. Therefore, particularly in the early phases of treatment, there is an emphasis on
developing the “we-mode, ”taking a collaborative stance from the beginning (see
Chapters 2 and 4), and on validating and normalizing feelings, with the clinician
adopting an empathic, validating stance. A core feature of MBT for trauma is to work
collaboratively with the patient toward formulating specific aims of treatment, as this
fosters feelings of agency, communicates realistic hope, and counters epistemic mistrust.
This process also includes crisis management and the formulation of goals related to
decreasing trauma-related symptoms and features, such as reducing self-harm, avoidance
behaviors, and re-enactments.
Third, and related to the previous point, MBT for trauma focuses on helping the
patient to manage strong feelings (e.g., anxiety) related to trauma and to actively avoid
dissociation, self-harm, and re-enactments before the content of trauma is discussed,
based on the identification and discussion of re-enactment cycles (see Figure 11.3 ).286 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Fourth, it is crucial to consider not only the “what ”but also the “how”of change and
social communication in patients with a history of trauma —that is, how they might open up
again to the social recalibration of their mind. The communication systems discussed in
Chapters 2 and9are helpful in this regard. In communication system 1, the clinician
communicates that their mind is available and able to tolerate, contain, and reflect upon
feelings and thoughts that are unbearable for the patient —essentially, that the patient is “not
alone. ”This not only helps to restore the patient ’s mentalizing capacities but also decreases
their epistemic vigilance, and fosters increased curiosity about the mind of the clinician. As a
result, in communication system 2, the patient ’s mentalizing capacities increase, as does the
patient ’s capacity to manage their emotional states and to navigate interpersonal
relationships in more adaptive ways. Next, in communication system 3, the patient is
actively supported to increasingly open up to and/or create a more benign social environ-
ment. This may involve helping the patient to change their social environment (e.g., by
ending specific relationships). Hence, in addition to the content of what is discussed, MBT
for trauma has a strong focus on the process of mentalizing and the process of change.
Finally, supervision is an essential component of MBT for trauma, as there is a
constant risk of secondary or vicarious traumatization of the clinician, and of subsequent
re-enactment in the clinician ’s relationships with others, including patients and members
of the therapeutic team.
Specific Principles of MBT for Trauma
MBT for trauma follows a number of specific principles (summarized in Box 11.1 ). Of
greatest importance, right from the start, are the first two principles —fostering a trusting
relationship anddeveloping a formulation with the patient. These have to be adopted in the
context of considerable wariness and distrust shown by the patient. The attitude of the
clinician —the not-knowing stance (see Chapter 3 )—is key to this process. Although MBT for
trauma does not follow a neat linear trajectory, and each intervention based on the principles
may be applied throughout treatment, they ar el i s t e dh e r ei nt h eo r d e ri nw h i c ht h e ya r e
central to the various phases of MBT, from the start of treatment to the ending phase.
1.Psychoeducation: Psychoeducational materials about the nature of (complex/
attachment) trauma, its impact, and the structure of the MBT program are provided
and discussed with the patient. This fosters the patient ’s mentalizing, increases their
sense of agency, and decreases their epistemic vigilance.
2.Validating and normalizing feelings: Trauma patients typically feel that what they
have experienced is beyond anything that other people have experienced and they
dare not speak about it, particularly when they also have strong feelings of shame,
guilt, and/or anxiety. Moreover, many trauma patients believe that they have to be
able to bear these experiences alone, however traumatic they have been. Therefore
normalizing and validating interventions that reframe the patient ’s experience in
terms of understandable responses to trauma not only reinforce a sense of emotional
connection, but also spark mutual understanding between the patient and the
clinician, leading to the re-emergence of mentalizing and epistemic trust. In this way
the clinician also communicates that even supposedly “intolerable ”feelings can be
tolerated and talked about.
3.Mentalizing traumatic experiences and their impact : Once the patient ’s mentalizing
capacities are more robust, specific traumatic events can be “micro-sliced, ”withTrauma 287
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
careful monitoring of the patient ’s anxiety and arousal. Micro-slicing is used to help
the patient to mentalize traumatic experiences and their impact on the patient and
their relationships. Initially the focus is on fostering the process of mentalizing,
rather than on making sense of the content of what the patient is describing. As
treatment progresses and the patient ’s mentalizing becomes more robust, alternative
and more adaptive ways of looking at the past and its influence on the present
become possible.
4.Improving emotion regulation strategies: This is achieved by considering and
discussing alternative and more adaptive ways of regulating emotions. As the
patient ’s need to externalize unmentalized traumatic experiences decreases, their
need to use maladaptive emotion regulation strategies typically also diminishes.
5.Salutogenesis and fostering changes in interpersonal relationships : Improvements
in mentalizing, emotion regulation, and epistemic trust allow a greater focus on
salutogenesis and fostering changes in interpersonal relationships. As the patient ’s
tendency to re-enact traumatic experiences decreases, they can begin to experiment
with new ways of being in relationships, and the clinician needs to actively support
these efforts. This may also include supporting the patient to end maladaptive
attachment relationships and to bring about other positive changes in their social
environment.
MBT-TF: A Group-Based Modular Program with Some
Individual Sessions
MBT -TF follows a group-based modular approach to trauma that can be offered either
as a stand-alone treatment or before a full course of MBT. Individual sessions are offered
at the beginning of treatment to develop the formulation (as described in Chapter 4 ) and
to identify core aspects of trauma that will be discussed in the group. In addition,
individual sessions may be offered if necessary to support the patient ’s work in the
group. The program follows principles of treatment common to other applications of
MBT (see Chapters 4 and5). MBT-TF is divided into three phases that mirror the three
communication systems described in Chapter 2 , based on the principle that stability in
each phase is necessary for effective communication before moving on to the interven-
tion in the next phase. The first phase focuses on stabilization and the development of
emotional and personal safety, the second phase focuses on processing trauma memory,Box 11.1 Specific MBT principles in the treatment of trauma.
/C15Develop a trusting relationship.
/C15Formulate aims collaboratively.
/C15Provide psychoeducation about trauma and mentalizing.
/C15Validate and normalize feelings in relation to trauma.
/C15Manage anxiety and dissociation.
/C15Improve emotion regulation.
/C15Mentalize traumatic experiences ( “micro-slice ”events) and their personal impact.
/C15Address interpersonal relationships and salutogenesis.288 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
and the third phase focuses on mourning the developmental and relational loss associ-
ated with trauma, and looking forward to the future.
Phase 1: Establishing Safety, Group Values, and the Framework
of Treatment
The key aims of the initial sessions in the MBT-TF group are to establish safety with
others and to outline the framework of treatment. As a result, the focus is on participants
meeting each other, agreeing group values, psychoeducation, and practicing anxiety
management. The sessions in this phase include:
1. agreeing shared group values
2. psychoeducation:
/C15the impact of trauma on the mind and the body
/C15the window of tolerance
/C15epistemic trust
/C15emotion regulation —anxiety, shame, and avoidance
/C15dissociation, flashbacks, and nightmares
/C15introduction to mentalizing
/C15non-mentalizing states
/C15mentalizing, me as a person, and relationships (alien self)
3. building relationships in the group
4. learning to recognize and manage anxiety, dissociation, and other emotions (in
oneself and in each other).
During phase 1 the clinician asks the patients to refrain from discussing details of their
personal trauma history, and does not engage in exposure and exploration of any individual
events. One at a time the patients introduce themselves to the other members of the group
and are asked to say something about themselves in relation to their decision to ask for
referral to MBT, and a little about their personal life (similar to what they would say if they
were meeting someone new in a social situation). Establishing group values (discussed in
Chapter 5 ) is essential in MBT groups for trauma if safety is to be maintained throughout the
running of the group. Clinicians email the agreed group values to the patients after the
session, asking them to reflect on them, and both clinicians and patients refer back to the
values whenever the cohesion and “we-ness ”of interactions in the group is threatened.
Group values that have been discussed and found useful by patients include the following:
/C15when we feel overwhelmed, letting the group know
/C15fairness —how we use a shared space together
/C15tolerance —respecting different opinions and perspectives
/C15recognizing that we come with good intentions —trusting others
/C15kindness toward each other
/C15open communication —saying what we really think on the inside
/C15checking in with how other people are feeling
/C15giving each other feedback
/C15safety and sensitivity when interacting with each other
/C15confidentiality.Trauma 289
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Once safety has been established, and knowledge and understanding of mentalizing
as the organizing principle of processing trauma have been embedded, phase 2 can start.
Phase 2: Mentalizing Trauma
The work in the MBT-TF group on mentalizing the trauma has two primary strands:
1.mentalizing the feelings and thoughts surrounding the trauma in terms of how they are
processed and experienced through different memory systems
2.mentalizing relationships affected by the trauma in terms of how they function and
are processed and experienced through different memory systems and ultimately
impact on the participant ’s lived experience.
Mentalizing the Feelings and Thoughts Surrounding the Trauma
This process is one of linking and integration. Fragmented experiences and memories
that trigger intense anxiety and avoidance because they are experienced in psychic
equivalence are mentalized through a carefully and systematically implemented process
of gradual elaboration, using the framework outlined in Table 11.4 .
As we described earlier, experiences become traumatic through not being shared or
experienced in a way that makes the individual feel that they are with someone in the
experience ( “we-mode ”). The group setting is used to focus joint attention on the
traumatic event through the following stepwise procedure:
1. recall
2. reflection (implications)
3. reflecting on the reflection ( meta-reflection , or reflecting on the implications) while
maintaining the experience with sufficient vividness to enable everyone in the group
to appreciate the feeling(s) that accompanied the experience historically, in the
present, and in reflecting on the present.
In practice, this stepwise procedure is not “stepped ”in any rigid form. The process
has to be undertaken sensitively, so the steps should be implemented dynamically and
informed by the patient ’s level of mentalizing as they engage in the tasks. The clinician
constantly monitors the mentalizing capacity of the patient in the moment, and supports
the re-establishment of stable mentalizing at any point when it becomes vulnerable
to collapse.
The combination of these steps (whether they are taken together or not) will achieve
the mentalizing of the traumatic memory. The making of connections between the
experience of recall and the memory itself ( “remembering remembering ”) is an import-
ant step in mentalizing the trauma, and may need to be repeated often.
Affective Reflection
Fully mentalizing traumatic experiences requires the capacity for affective reflection —
that is, an integration of feelings and thoughts (which could be referred to as “felt
feelings, ”combining the experience with the reflection on the experience). Affective
reflection is achieved by gradually elaborating the trauma narrative, bringing in the
evocative detail of feelings that need to be reflected on in the immediate present and
also in relation to the group, and ultimately attempting to experience and reflect on
the group ’s feelings in relation to the experience. In short, this is mentalizing within290 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
self-experience ( “I-mode ”), mentalizing others and their mind states ( “me-mode ”), and
mentalizing others about self ( “personalized me-mode ”) (for further discussion of
these modes, see Chapters 6 and7). All of these processes represent different levels of
complexity of mentalizing.
The patient is asked to talk openly about their trauma narrative while the rest of the
group listens attentively with minimal interruptions. Once the patient has finished
speaking, the group participants are encouraged to help the patient to elaborate on the
feelings related to the trauma at the time, along with their current feelings about the
trauma. Importantly, the group participants and the clinician do this as conversational
partners , asking questions and making comments that are “with”the patientTable 11.4 Framework for mentalizing affects and memories
Memory Retrieving and
starting to
create a
narrative of past
experience
(What was he
wearing at the
time? )Affective
reflection on
elaborated
elements,
elaborating on
the narrative,
clarifying and
enriching it
(What feelings
go with that
memory? Are
there any
thoughts that
acompany it? )Affective
reflection on
current feelings
in terms of past
experience,
spelling out the
implications of
the memory
(How does the
memory affect
you? What
feelings do you
have at the
moment, as you
remember it? ),
and affective
reflection on
current feelings
while talking in
the groupAffective
reflection on
current
feelings in
relation to
others in the
group ( How
might others
see your
experience? ),
and initial
testing out of
expectations
about others ’
experience ( Is
what she
thinks what
you really
thought? )
Autobiographical :
What happened?X
Emotional/
implicit :
What emotions
are linked to it?XXXX
Procedural:
What actions do
you take to deal
with it/cope/?XX
Semantic :
What does it
mean about you
as a person?XXTrauma 291
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
(i.e., empathic validation of their experience) rather than “to”the patient (i.e., avoiding
giving excessive reassurance, making suggestions, or offering solutions). The aim is to
accompany the patient and to prevent them from avoiding over-elaboration of the
trauma narrative. This process activates the autobiographical and implicit emotional
memory, the “there and then, ”and it can be painful and frightening.
During the processing sessions, it is important for the clinician to be curious about
the narrative, with an explicit focus on opening up the story rather than trying to make
links or meaning. The clinician will need to remind the group that there is no right or
wrong way to do this task, and that the aim is to create connections between the
memories in the past and the present, as trauma memories are fragmented.
Clinical Example: Lydia (continued)
CLINICIAN :Lydia, tell us in your own words what happened and what pieces keep coming back into
your mind that trouble you, and we will listen and try to accompany you as you talk.
CLINICIAN : Get your mind back to then. What does it feel like as an innocent girl experiencing that?
CLINICIAN : Can you describe your immediate feeling and then how you felt as a person later?
CLINICIAN : What was it like at school with friends at that time?
CLINICIAN : Was there anyone you could talk to?
As we explained earlier, this process is not a stepwise experience but flows relatively
smoothly and serves the purpose of embedding the memory as mentalized and
reflected-upon experience. The nature of embedding entails activating different types
of memory at selected points. The initial memory experience and description are
autobiographical and implicit/emotional. However, the affective reflection should also
aim to explore ways in which the memory is retained not simply as the autobiographical
memory of the event but also as it affects the patient ’s behavior —that is, the way the
patient has come to act in order to manage or cope with what they have experienced is
also reflected on.
Clinical Example: Lydia (continued)
CLINICIAN :Taking that feeling, can you say something about when you have the same feeling now
and how you cope with it?
CLINICIAN :Does it make you go into “doing mode ”? If so, what happens?
CLINICIAN :How is it affecting your life now? Thinking about that, what sort of judgment do you have
on yourself? Are you forgiving or punishing, for example, in how you treat yourself?
A further, more complex part of this process involves exploring how the traumatic
experience continues to affect the patient more generally —that is, how the experience has
shaped their self-perception —and to address how, for example, aspects of a traumatic
event may have led patients to see themselves as bad or guilty.292 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Clinical Example: Lydia (continued)
CLINICIAN :So let ’s have a discussion about how you see yourself when you feel like that.
CLINICIAN :Perhaps the group can say afterwards whether they pick up that feeling you have about
yourself, so we can think about it together.
The clinician diverts the other group members from saying “Id o n ’t see you like that ,”as
they will naturally do this and also offer reassurances such as “You are not like that ”or“You
shouldn ’t feel like that. It was not your fault .”Instead, the clinician tries to steer the group
members to consider what aspects of the patient come across to them as showing the feeling
they are describing. For example, if the patient is discussing shame, the group members can
say what they observe and experience about the patient that reveals the patient ’s underlying
personal sense of shame, and even what they experience about the patient that communi-
cates that they are trying to cope with it or hide it —that is, how does it come across to others?
The aim is to encourage the patient to begin to reflect on the expression of their shame in the
context of interacting with others: “How do I see myself and how do they see me when I am like
this? What effect does this have on my relationship with others in the group? ”
There will naturally be reluctance to engage in this exercise, which may be expressed
as thought avoidance in the following ways:
/C15slipping into generalities rather than contemplating memories of the specific
traumatic episode
/C15refusal to contemplate the experience
/C15destruction of thought (dissociation).
The clinician needs to tackle these responses as they arise. Moving between memory
systems may be one way in which the group members engage in avoidance, particularly
moving into the level of meanings before the specific experience has been explored.
A rapid closure of working with implicit emotional memory and moving on to the
activation of semantic memory will usher in pretend mode; this will lead to a severing of
affect and thought, and to ever-increasing generality and discussion that is detached and
devoid of meaningful content. The clinician who is working with the group should try to
keep these sudden mental shifts to a minimum while managing the participants ’anxiety
by using the positive support that the group can offer the patient in this process,
modeling encouragement, elaboration, and support.
Mentalizing Relationships Affected by the Trauma
We assume that if communication is opened up within the participant ’s social network,
achievements within the group are more likely to generalize to all of the domains of that
individual ’s social experience. Ideally the exploration of relationships would happen
alongside the exploration of traumatic experiences, but in reality it often follows it.
However, the exploration of relationships should follow the same structure of affective
reflection as that outlined earlier, moving from reflection on immediate relationship
experience to reflecting on the implications. Again, the clinician keeps in mind the range
of mentalizing components:
1. the experience of past relationships along with the trauma experience and how they
played out togetherTrauma 293
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
2. reflection on the relationships of the past self from the perspective of the current self
looking back
3. experience of the self in the exploration now
4. current relationships as they are experienced in the patient ’s life and in the group.
Each participant ’s social network is usually naturally explored by the group. This is
facilitated by using a relational map, which can initially be done in the formulation with the
individual patients but is now actively used in the group to formalize the exploratory work.
Phase 3: Review, Reappraisal, and Looking to the Future
Care should be taken when planning the MBT-TF group to ensure that there are 4 –6
weeks remaining after completion of the sessions that constitute phase 2. The sessions in
the final phase are structured in a similar way to those of MBT-G (see Chapter 5 ), with
an initial go-around and check-in with the participants, followed by agreeing a focus for
the session, sharing the time between participants so that all of them have space to talk
about the issues that they have raised, and integrating topics raised in the session with
previous discussions about the processing of trauma that took place during earlier
sessions. Patients are asked to explore different perceptions of themselves, looking back
on themselves in the light of their new understanding of themselves in the present. This
supports the start of a process of reflection on the impact that their negative perception
of themselves has had on their lives. If treatment has gone well, trauma reactions are
reflected on as understandable but avoidable —going into fight/flight or “shutdown ”
mode is no longer necessary, and secondary attachment strategies are muted, so that
the patients feel less anxious in their relationships.
The focus in phase 3 is also on what has been achieved, thinking about the ending of
the group and what this brings up for group members in terms of previous loss, as well as
revisiting and reviewing their initial hopes and expectations about treatment. The
sessions focus on what the patients have noticed about themselves and each other since
the start of the treatment, and involve reflecting on the experience of talking about their
traumatic memories. Are they more compassionate toward themselves and forgiving of
their problems in their current relationships? Can they accept their past as being “there
and then, ”rather than experiencing it in the “here and now ”? Have they built a more
coherent life narrative of themselves, and do they no longer need to avoid memories? Do
past memories no longer trigger low-mentalizing modes, so that they are less painful and
less destabilizing of the present self? Are the patients able to think about themselves
coherently across time and be present with others in their current life, rather than being
an outsider looking in?
The final sessions provide an opportunity to reflect on what the patients have found
useful from the group and what they want to keep hold of in the future. It is helpful at
this stage to revisit the initial values of the group and to ask the participants to reflect on
those values and decide whether they are relevant to how they will continue to interact
with others in their lives.
Concluding Remarks
This chapter describes the mentalizing approach to the conceptualization and treatment
of patients with trauma. From a mentalizing perspective, trauma is thought to disrupt294 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
the coordinated functioning of a number of key biobehavioral systems, including the
stress, attachment, mentalizing, and epistemic trust systems. Complex trauma (or
attachment trauma) in particular leads to a cascade of disruptions in these systems,
leaving the affected individual prone to closing themselves off from the social environ-
ment and at risk of re-enacting traumatic experiences. This often leads them to be
perceived as difficult to treat or “hard to reach. ”MBT provides a systematic approach
to the management and treatment of individuals who have experienced trauma. This
approach may be particularly helpful in patients with a history of more complex
attachment trauma, as it provides a comprehensive and coherent approach to addressing
the major features of these patients.
References
1. Luyten P, Campbell C, Fonagy P.
Borderline personality disorder, complex
trauma, and problems with self and
identity: a social-communicative
approach. J Pers 2020; 88:8 8–105.
2. Asnes AG, Leventhal JM. Connecting the
dots in childhood and adolescent trauma.
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2011; 165:8 7–9.
3. Teicher MH, Samson JA. Childhood
maltreatment and psychopathology: a
case for ecophenotypic variants as
clinically and neurobiologically distinct
subtypes. Am J Psychiatry 2013; 170:
1114 –33.
4. Anda RF, Felitti VJ, Bremner JD et al. The
enduring effects of abuse and related
adverse experiences in childhood: a
convergence of evidence from
neurobiology and epidemiology. Eur Arch
Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2006; 256:
174–86.
5. Fonagy P, Luyten P, Allison E, Campbell
C. What we have changed our minds
about: Part 1. Borderline personality
disorder as a limitation of resilience.
Borderline Personal Disord Emot Dysregul
2017; 4: 11.
6. Fonagy P, Luyten P, Allison E, Campbell
C. What we have changed our minds
about: Part 2. Borderline personality
disorder, epistemic trust and the
developmental significance of social
communication. Borderline Personal
Disord Emot Dysregul 2017; 4:9 .
7. Allen JG. Coping with Trauma: Hope
Through Understanding , 2nd ed.Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association Publishing, 2005.
8. Fonagy P, Steele M, Steele H et al. The
Emanuel Miller Memorial Lecture 1992.
The theory and practice of resilience.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 1994; 35:
231–57.
9. Fonagy P, Target M. Attachment, trauma,
and psychoanalysis: where psychoanalysis
meets neuroscience. In: Jurist EJ, Slade A,
Bergner S, eds. Mind to Mind: Infant
Research, Neuroscience, and
Psychoanalysis . New York: Other Press,
2008; 15 –49.
10. Allen JG, Lemma A, Fonagy P. Trauma.
In: Bateman AW, Fonagy P, eds.
Handbook of Mentalizing in Mental
Health Practice . Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association, 2012;
419–44.
11. Allen JG. Mentalizing in the Development
and Treatment of Attachment Trauma .
London, UK: Karnac Books Ltd, 2013.
12. Fonagy P, Luyten P, Allison E. Epistemic
petrification and the restoration of
epistemic trust: a new conceptualization
of borderline personality disorder and its
psychosocial treatment. J Pers Disord
2015; 29: 575 –609.
13. Bonanno GA, Diminich ED. Annual
Research Review: Positive adjustment to
adversity —trajectories of minimal-impact
resilience and emergent resilience. J Child
Psychol Psychiatry 2013; 54: 378 –401.
14. Southwick SM, Bonanno GA, Masten AS
et al. Resilience definitions, theory, and
challenges: interdisciplinary perspectives.Trauma 295
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Eur J Psychotraumatol 2014; 5.https://
doi.org/10.3402/ejpt.v5.25338 .
15. Denckla CA, Mancini AD, Consedine NS
et al. Distinguishing postpartum and
antepartum depressive trajectories in a
large population-based cohort: the impact
of exposure to adversity and offspring
gender. Psychol Med 2018: 48: 1139 –47.
16. Orcutt HK, Bonanno GA, Hannan SM,
Miron LR. Prospective trajectories of
posttraumatic stress in college women
following a campus mass shooting.
J Traum Stress 2014; 27: 249 –56.
17. Pervanidou P, Chrousos GP. Metabolic
consequences of stress during childhood
and adolescence. Metabolism 2012; 61:
611–19.
18. McEwen BS. Physiology and neurobiology
of stress and adaptation: central role of
the brain. Physiol Rev 2007; 87: 873 –904.
19. Gunnar M, Quevedo K. The neurobiology
of stress and development. Annu Rev
Psychol 2007; 58: 145 –73.
20. Gunnar MR, Quevedo K, De Kloet RE
et al. Early care experiences and HPA axis
regulation in children: a mechanism for
later trauma vulnerability. Prog Brain Res
2007; 167: 137 –49.
21. Feldman R. The neurobiology of human
attachments. Trends Cogn Sci 2017; 21:
80–99.
22. Fredrickson BL. The role of positive
emotions in positive psychology: the
broaden-and-build theory of positive
emotions. Am Psychol 2001; 56: 218 –26.
23. Mikulincer M, Shaver PR. Enhancing the
“broaden and build ”cycle of attachment
security in adulthood: from the
laboratory to relational contexts and
societal systems. Int J Environ Res Public
Health 2020; 17: 2054.
24. Miller GE, Chen E, Zhou ES. If it goes up,
must it come down? Chronic stress and
the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenocortical axis in humans. Psychol
Bull 2007; 133:2 5–45.
25. Luyten P, Fonagy P. An integrative,
attachment-based approach to the
management and treatment of patientswith persistent somatic complaints. In:
Hunter J, Maunder R, eds. Improving
Patient Treatment with Attachment
Theory: A Guide for Primary Care
Practitioners and Specialists . New York,
NY: Springer, 2016; 127 –44.
26. Arnsten AFT. The biology of being
frazzled. Science 1998; 280: 1711 –12.
27. Mayes LC. A developmental perspective
on the regulation of arousal states. Semin
Perinatol 2000; 24: 267 –79.
28. Fonagy P, Gergely G, Jurist EL, Target M.
Developmental issues in normal
adolescence and adolescent breakdown.
In:Affect Regulation, Mentalization, and
the Development of the Self . New York:
Other Press, 2002; 317 –40.
29. Jurist EL. Mentalized affectivity.
Psychoanal Psychol 2005; 22: 426 –44.
30. Widom CS. Posttraumatic stress disorder
in abused and neglected children grown
up.Am J Psychiatry 1999; 156: 1223 –9.
31. Cloitre M, Scarvalone P, Difede J.
Posttraumatic stress disorder, self- and
interpersonal dysfunction among sexually
retraumatized women. J Traum Stress
1997; 10: 437 –52.
32. Allen JG. Traumatic Relationships and
Serious Mental Disorders . Chichester UK:
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2001.
33. Main M, Hesse E. Parents ’unresolved
traumatic experiences are related to infant
disorganized attachment status: is
frightened and/or frightening parental
behavior the linking mechanism? In:
Greenberg MT, Cicchetti D, Cummings
EM, eds. Attachment in the Preschool
Years: Theory, Research, and Intervention .
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
1990; 161 –81.
34. Clarkin JF, Kernberg OF, Yeomans F.
Transference-Focused Psychotherapy for
Borderline Personality Disorder Patients .
New York, NY: The Guilford Press, 1999.
35. Cicchetti D, Toth SL. Child maltreatment.
Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2005; 1: 409 –38.
36. Antonovsky A. Unraveling the Mystery of
Health: How People Manage Stress and Stay
Well. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 1987.296 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
37. Storebo OJ, Stoffers-Winterling JM,
Vollm BA et al. Psychological therapies
for people with borderline personality
disorder. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2020; 5: CD012955.
38. Bateman A, Motz A, Yakeley J. Antisocial
personality disorder in community and
prison settings. In: Bateman A, Fonagy P,
eds.Handbook of Mentalizing in MentalHealth Practice , 2nd ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association
Publishing, 2019; 335 –49.
39. Smits ML, Luyten P, Feenstra DJ et al.
Trauma and outcomes of mentalization-
based therapy for individuals with
borderline personality disorder. Am
J Psychother 2022; 75:1 2–20.Trauma 297
h di 00 98088960 402 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part III
Chapter
12Application and Adaptations for Mental Health
Presentations
Eating Disorders
Introduction
The model of mentalizing is highly relevant to furthering both our understanding of and
clinical practice relating to eating disorders [ 1]. Severely impaired mentalizing in patients
with eating disorders may account for the severe emotional and cognitive fluctuations that
contribute to symptom maintenance, compromise the response to therapeutic interven-
tion, affect the capacity of the patient to engage with psychosocial treatment, and destabil-
ize the clinician ’s mentalizing, with the consequent risk of enactments or iatrogenic effects.
Mentalization-based treatment for eating disorders (MBT-ED) is not an evidence-
based therapy at the time of writing, and should be offered as part of, or supplementary
to, a better-established therapy such as the Maudsley Model of Anorexia Nervosa
Treatment for Adults (MANTRA) —a manualized individual treatment for young adult
patients with anorexia nervosa (AN) that was developed by Schmidt et al. [ 2]. MANTRA is
the first-line psychological intervention for adults with AN [ 3]. This intervention is
centered around a patient ’s workbook that combines elements of cognitive –behavioral
therapy (e.g., a diagrammatic case formulation that focuses on maintaining factors) and
writing tasks, supporting emotion expression and regulation, based on the seminal ideas of
James Pennebaker [ 4]; it shares elements with an MBT approach (e.g., motivational
interviewing techniques) [ 5]. If an eating disorder presents with co-occurring borderline
personality disorder (BPD), MBT-ED can be recommended as a reasonable approach.
A randomized controlled trial found MBT-ED to be superior to a control treatment,
although it should be noted that there was a very high level of participant dropout in this
trial [ 6]. However, MBT-ED is supported by considerable evidence of specific shortcom-
ings in mentalizing in individuals with eating disorders. This suggests that clinicians
working with patients with eating disorders might find it helpful to be aware of these
patients ’mentalizing anomalies, and that further development and validation of MBT-ED
may be warranted. Establishing the evidence base for MBT-ED remains at an early stage.
Mentalizing in Eating DisordersEmbodied Mentalizing
Hilda Bruch, a pioneer of the modern psychodynamic treatment of eating disorders,
should be credited with being the first to draw attention to mentalizing anomalies that
are characteristic of eating disorders, particularly AN. She noted that her patients
commonly lacked awareness of inner experiences and failed to rely on their subjectivity,
feelings, thoughts, and bodily sensations to control their behavior; this contributed to a
298
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
frequent sense of lack of control, which they compensated for by extraordinary demon-
strations of determination to assert their identity, competence, and effectiveness through
physical or bodily experience [ 7,8]. We would now consider experiencing the mind via
the body —embodied mentalizing —to be a key and foundational aspect of ordinary
mentalizing [ 9,10], and view Bruch ’s clinical observations as a recognition of distortions
in the developmental processes related to embodied mentalizing (for further discussion
of embodied mentalizing, see Chapter 9 ). The infant ’s first experiences of the self being
recognized are through bodily contact with a caregiver who accurately perceives
momentary changes in the infant ’s self-states. A caregiver ’s bodily (i.e., non-verbal)
responsiveness to the infant ’s physical cues of feelings and wishes predicts the infant ’s
socioemotional experience in early childhood, including attachment security at 15 and 36
months of age, and language abilities, academic skills, behavior problems, and social
competence at 54 months of age [ 11–13]. Furthermore, caregiver responsiveness is
reduced by parenting stress [ 14] and postpartum depression [ 15], highlighting it as a
potential mediator of these risk factors for typical development.
The Ineffective/Non-Mentalizing Modes
In the early years of the twenty-first century, Fonagy et al. [ 16] proposed a mentalizing
model of disordered eating. This model suggested that eating disorders might involve an
inappropriately persistent emphasis on embodied mentalizing into adolescence, and
difficulty in representing mental states as ideas or feelings rather than as bodily experi-
ences: “Physical attributes such as weight come to reflect states such as internal well-
being, control, sense of self-worth, and so on, far beyond the normal tendency for this to
happen in adolescence ”[16, p. 405]. They described the experience of individuals with
eating disorders in terms of the three hallmarks of ineffective mentalizing (for a detailed
description of the non-mentalizing modes, see Chapter 2 ):
/C15“Inside-Out ”thinking, or the excessive certainty of psychic equivalence
/C15“elephant in the room ”thinking, or the excessive uncertainty of pretend mode
/C15the“quick fix ”or“Outside-In ”thinking of teleological mode.
Psychic Equivalence
In psychic equivalence, bodily metaphors do not function mainly as representations ,
which are capable of containing an experience, but as presentations , which are experi-
enced as concrete facts or parts of reality that are impossible to negotiate or compromise.
In psychic equivalence, “as if ”turns into “is.”There is no possibility of alternative
constructions of reality beyond the harsh corporeality of immediate experience.
Normal weight-related thoughts become oppressive.
Clinical Example: Psychic Equivalence Thinking
“I just knew that thin was attractive, desirable. It was everything that was good. I had always
known it, but it somehow became like an edict .”
The mere thought of food can be experienced as actually eating it and potentially causing
weight gain: “I would have a ‘bad thought ’about a cake in a shop window. Then I would
think that I had eaten it and then I would have to exercise the corresponding amount to lose
the weight .”Eating Disorders 299
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Negative beliefs about the self feel real: “I had no right to exist. I was a fraud. I felt like a
cuckoo in the nest, alien, too big, too obtrusive, unwanted. Not fitting in. ”
These examples from the narratives of patients who had recovered from AN offer indica-
tions that a mental event (a thought, belief, or wish), although recognized as internal, has
the same status for the patient as physical reality. The impression of the body and its
appearance becomes equated with the self.
Pretend Mode
The emergence of the non-mentalizing pretend mode also suggests that subjectivity is
separated from physical reality. This may be most apparent in the pervasiveness of the self-
deception that can dominate the mental states of patients with eating disorders: “Iw a s
cheating, eating things that had no calories in them —c a b b a g e ,c a r r o t s ,c e l e r y .B u tw h i l eIw a s
doing it I kind of believed it was nutritious .”Decoupling of thoughts and feelings from reality
(pseudomentalizing orhypermentalizing ) leads to feelings of emptiness, meaninglessness, and
even dissociation, which are sometimes dealt with by overeating, bingeing and purging. The
pretend reality is protected by the consistent rej ection of alternative realities that threaten the
pretend mode, which may drive the secretive and isolated nature of eating disorders.
Clinical Example: Pretend Mode Thinking
“I spent a lot of time trying to hide from people. I was more conscious of how they would see
me rather than how I would see myself. They might interfere if they noticed I was anorexic.
I wore lots of baggy clothes, ate minimal-calorie meals, and I would try to hide it from people
because I thought they would not understand why I was doing it. I did not have the thought
that I was anorexic, rather the thought that other people might think I was and would not
understand. Occasionally, people would comment and I would get angry and feel intruded
on—anxious that they would try to stop me .”
The protection of this imagined version of reality also manifests as an exaggerated pursuit
of self-control to avoid the threat presented by seeing oneself through the eyes of others
(social perception): “I often needed to re-assert myself, which I did (by purging, bingeing, self-
harm) . When I didn ’t eat for a while, I was in control —so much better than the feeling that
nothing meant anything, which I dreaded. ”
In therapy, pretend mode generates endless inconsequential narratives about thoughts,
feelings, and interpersonal scenarios that are disconnected from the patient ’s experienced
reality and are felt as meaningless: “After my first session I knew what I had to say. I said it.
I just talked about ‘what food meant to me, ’I talked about feeling rejected by everyone. It
meant nothing. She [the therapist] lapped it up. After the sessions I felt quite pleased. ‘I could
be good at this, ’I thought. ”
Teleological Mode
The prominence of teleological mode in patients with eating disorders is suggested by
indications that physical action is seen as the only way to alter or manage their mental
states. The over-valuing of physical appearance is of course itself teleological, and motiv-
ates the patient to engage in behaviors that constitute symptoms of AN and bulimia
nervosa (BN). Bodily modifications (e.g., change in body weight, self-harm) occur in the300 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
physical domain and are observable, and therefore directly affect mental states. The illusion
that the mind can be controlled through controlling the body is a core belief in AN.
Clinical Example: Teleological Mode Thinking
“If I triumphed over my body I triumphed over my mind .”
“Being thin keeps me protected .”
“Being physically at risk gives me control over the people around me .”
“I hope to arrive at something indescribable and good inside that will make others behave
differently toward me .”
The view that risk and danger, often of social exclusion, are reduced by teleological thinking
is implicit in these beliefs. If the external state and appearance of one ’sb o d ya r eb e l i e v e dt o
provide the solution to the problem of achieving a sense of social value, then confusion
about what “feeling valued ”might actually involve is inevitable. Critically, external markers of
self-worth are the only ones that feel real or true: “I just knew that the perfect body shape
would make me wanted, irresistible. It was just that I came to have a crazy idea about what that
shape looked like. But I knew that if I achieved it I would be in my perfect place .”
The Wish for a Non-Mentalizing Space
The emergence of the non-mentalizing modes can be seen as part of an active wish to
stop thinking and feeling because this generates anxiety and confusion —or, to put it
bluntly, to stop mentalizing.
Clinical Example: Closing Down Mentalizing
CLINICIAN (addressing a patient who had recovered from AN): What was it like for you being anorexic?
Do you remember what thoughts and feelings you had at the time?
PATIENT :Just being very focused on what I had to do during the day and not having to think about
the things that I would have to think about normally. I had been quite introspective before. I had
to drive out any mental experience and just focus on what had to be done. Not question things.
My experience of everything was rather flat and empty.
Another patient who had also recovered from an eating disorder gave a very similar
account:
PATIENT :Especially anything to do with eating, or getting food ready, or actually eating it, I would do
in a very, very mechanical state in which I was not thinking or feeling anything. I was going
through the motions in a very ritualized way. I did things like buying stuff from the same place so
I wouldn ’t have to think about it. I remember feeling physical hunger and the satisfaction that
I was not giving in to it was the only important thing.
Typically, these retrospective reports capture the experience of an existence marked by
a rigid separation of mental and bodily experience. As we described in Chapters 2 and10,
mentalizing has an integrative function —it helps us to draw together our sensoryEating Disorders 301
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
experiences and thoughts to support our sense of self. The shutting down of the possibility
of this mentalized self-integration can create a disjointed experience of selfhood.
Clinical Example: Disjointed Experience of Selfhood
PATIENT :I felt mechanical. I felt my emotions controlled my secret behavior. My mind, my official
mind, controlled my public behavior and there was no connection between them. That was
something that I had not felt before. There were whole periods of time where I felt like [I was] a
spectator, I did not feel I was in my head or in control of what I was doing. This is what I meant by
mechanical. I was watching it and managing it.
The pervasive failure of mentalizing and the accompanying loss of its integrative
function can reveal pre-existing disorganization of the self-structure caused by social
experiences that are known to increase the risk of development of eating disorders.
Fonagy and Target suggested that the disengagement of mentalizing tends to reveal pre-
existing discontinuities in the self-structure [ 17,18], and they proposed that disorganized
early attachment can segue into discontinuities within the self, which can be amplified by
trauma. When mentalizing has broken down, part of the self can be experienced as
clusters of persecutory ideas that are felt to be coming from within the self but at the
same time are alien to it —untouchable and separated from the self, with little opportun-
ity for moderation or modification. We have referred to these internally tormenting
parts of the self as the alien self (see also Chapters 2 and10).
Clinical Example: The Alien Self
PATIENT :I felt like somebody outside myself was bullying me and not taking any notice of what
I thought or felt. It was like being tortured by someone else.
CLINICIAN :Tell me about this person ...
PATIENT :Like a bully at school. Someone who did not care, who would just push and push. Totally
unsympathetic, with no patience for any feebleness, who wanted to see if I was tough on myself
and not at all self-indulgent.
Self-harm can be experienced as relief —a concrete act against these persecutory parts
of the self that cannot be reached or regulated through cognition and can only be warded
off through physical actions.
Stress and Mentalizing
Stress undermines mentalizing and occurs at toxic levels in individuals who are predis-
posed to it for various reasons or combinations of reasons, such as constitutionally
heightened reactivity, the impact of adverse social experiences, or the physical stress
generated by loss of body weight [ 19].
In our early thinking about the relationship between mentalizing and mental health
disorders, we suggested that individual attachment histories and maltreatment may302 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
weaken or undermine the mentalizing capacities of individuals in adolescence, and
impair their ability to manage everyday stressors as well as attachment stress [ 16].
Adolescence is a developmentally vulnerable stage even in the normal development of
social cognition, but this does not in itself cause eating disorders. We suggested that
eating disorders are the consequence of a relatively limited capacity to mentalize ordin-
ary social experiences (e.g., excessive demand for excellence, difficulties going through
puberty, or peer rejection), which makes current life experience feel like an insurmount-
able challenge. Difficulties in mentalizing may be associated with a history of trauma,
childhood sexual abuse, early adversity, or neglect; the mentalizing difficulties result in
the emergence of non-mentalizing modes when the individual is faced with the chal-
lenges of the social world. The disorganization of the psychological or mental self is a
manifestation of the dominance of psychic equivalence, pretend mode, and teleological
mode that is thought to be responsible for distorted cognitions, dysregulated affect, and a
disorganized self-structure, which underpin the eating disorder.
Persistence of Anorexia Nervosa and Other Eating Disorders
Only around half of all patients who receive treatment for AN or BN achieve full
recovery after 4 –10 years [ 20], and the proportion does not increase much even after
longer time periods [ 21]. Individuals with persistent AN frequently state that they wish
to change but cannot do so [ 22]. Current models of AN do not distinguish stages of the
disorder in which vulnerability and treatment interact to establish significant persistence.
The current framework for the MBT model of eating disorders aims to separate several
components that unfold across time, from first presentation of preoccupation with body
weight and shape to the clinical threshold for weight loss, and finally to a chronic state
characteristic of enduring disordered eating. Chronic starvation has an effect on mental-
izing. According to mentalizing theory, anomalies of social cognition are seen as
adaptations to the ordinary developmental challenges of adolescence in individuals
who are vulnerable to eating disorders as a result of personality traits, early experience
(including attachment history), and genetic predisposition. Mentalizing theory also views
psychic equivalence, pretend mode, and teleological mode as the outcomes of imbalances
between the poles of the dimensions of mentalizing (described in detail in Chapter 2 ).
More recent theoretical and clinical discussions about applications of the MBT model
have emphasized the role of the social group around an individual in helping them to
recover the ability to mentalize [ 23]. Some individuals might lack a mentalizing social
group around them, or they might withdraw from an already existing mentalizing social
network for emotional reasons. In individuals with AN, the process of normal recovery
of mentalizing may be compromised by the reactions of others to the eating disorder,
which are often characterized by anxiety, fear, and frustration; this creates a disconnect
because the individual with AN feels that their weight loss is desirable and therefore,
feeling misunderstood and perhaps ashamed, they withdraw from the social environ-
ment that would normally support their mentalizing [ 24,25]. The combined impact of
social withdrawal and the persistent struggle with mentalizing (again in the context of the
known vulnerability factors for AN) generates powerful feelings of epistemic mistrust
and epistemic hypervigilance (see Chapter 2 and also [ 23]). As the person ’s beliefs about
weight, eating, and body shape are not understood by those in their community, they
voluntarily abandon the community and their mentalizing is not recovered; this in turnEating Disorders 303
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
deepens their mistrust and leads to further social withdrawal, making the recovery of
mentalizing even more unlikely. Moreover, the traumatic aspects of medical interven-
tions, such as feeding experiences in inpatient or outpatient settings, can further increase
mistrust and closing of the patient ’s mind to information from their social environment,
as well as reinforcing their aversive cognitions about food. An additional process that
drives persistence of eating disorders relates to chronic stress, which may relate to an
overactivation of the fight/flight response that is incompatible with the recovery of
mentalizing [ 19].
Conceptualizing the Complexity of Eating Disorders
The mentalizing model views the symptoms of eating disorders as attempted solutions to
underlying problems of social (self-)regulation. We assume that at the core of eating
disorders is a social dysfunction consequent to exposure to adverse social interactions,
compounded by emotion dysregulation undermined by biological factors and
heightened levels of stress, and the disorganization of attachment relationships.
We propose that the social dysfunction that arises from the interaction of these risk
factors causes the loss of balanced mentalizing, which —as we have noted throughout this
book —is key to engagement in social communication (see Figure 12.1 ). The individual ’s
loss of interest in social communication interferes with their social learning and the
potential for social and self-correction that make change, remission, and recovery
possible. The processes of ostension (the self-recognition that is key to accepting
communications from others as relevant to the self, generalizable outside the specific
and current context, and suitable for integration into a stable self-representation) are
ineffective, leading to epistemic dysfunction —that is, epistemic hypervigilance and
mistrust or, conversely, inappropriate credulity. The individual ’s social network is
further compromised by external and internal shame, which reinforces social withdrawal
and undermines the potential for the recovery of mentalizing that social support can
History of
adversity 
Insecure/
disorganized
attachments
Emotion
dysregulationFailure of
ostensionLoss of
balanced
mentalizingSocial dysfunction Communication
failures
High
epistemic
vigilance or
hypervigilanceLimits on
social
learning
processesEpistemic
mistrustImperviousness to
social influence
Shame/social
disruptionCompromised
social
network Loss of interest
in social
communication
Fig. 12.1 Pathway to the limitations to social learning that lead to eating disorders.304 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
provide. The overall result is imperviousness to social communication, and the persist-
ence of beliefs (e.g., distorted beliefs about body shape) and strategies for emotional self-
organization (e.g., control of eating, excessive exercise) that often make the patient
inaccessible to change through psychological therapy.
This model is consistent with some early findings from studies of social cognition in
eating disorders. There is evidence to suggest that social functioning is substantially
impaired in AN, particularly as part of the cognitive interpersonal model first outlined
by Schmidt and Treasure [ 26], with later work summarizing the cognitive and emotional
traits and the perpetuating aspects underpinning the model [ 22,27,28]. The model
proposed by Schmidt and Treasure has a great deal in common with MBT theory and
its focus on the intrapersonal consequences of isolation, depression, and chronic stress
that accumulate in the severe and enduring stage of the illness in a singular causal and
maintenance framework. Most individuals with AN show interpersonal difficulties, with,
for example, problems with intimacy [ 29]. Good social functioning is an important
predictor of favorable outcomes in AN, whereas premorbid poor social relating, empathy
deficits, and social interaction problems have been linked to poor outcomes [ 30].
Individuals with AN exhibit features of alexithymia [ 31] and social anhedonia [ 32]
characterized by difficulties in describing subjective feeling states and distinguishing
between feelings and bodily sensations, and an impoverished imagination, all of which
point to difficulties in social functioning. Converging evidence for this assumption
comes from a range of sources, including research on attachment, theory of mind
(ToM) and mentalizing, and research on the cognitive and emotional capacities neces-
sary for social self-regulation.
Attachment and Eating Disorders
The MBT theoretical model links vulnerability to eating disorders with insecure attach-
ment, as it sees attachment relationships as the prototypical context within which
interpersonal understanding naturally evolves in infancy and thrives in adult relation-
ships [ 23]. A comprehensive review of the relationship between attachment and mental-
izing and their association with child and adolescent eating pathology found 14 studies
that demonstrated a positive correlation between attachment insecurity and eating
disorders in childhood and adolescence [ 33]. Attachment insecurity in infancy was a
weak predictor of eating pathology in childhood or adolescence, whereas attachment
insecurity in the pre-adolescent period predicted the development of eating pathology
1 year later much more robustly. Significantly, attachment to peers, but not to parents,
predicted eating pathology in mid-adolescence. Imbalances in mentalizing (i.e., ineffect-
ive mentalizing) mirror the association of attachment with eating disorders. Seven
studies identified a correlation between problems with mentalizing and eating pathology.
Strong associations were found between difficulties in emotion recognition and eating
disorders in adolescents, and these associations were particularly strong in relation to
AN. For adults, meta-analyses have provided mixed evidence, with some studies showing
strong associations [ 34] and others reporting weaker associations [ 35] between attach-
ment and eating disorders, mediated by emotion regulation and depressive symptoms
[36]. More recently, a meta-analysis of 35 studies found higher rates of insecure
attachment in clinical groups of individuals with eating disorders compared with com-
munity controls, with a large effect size, across measurement methods and differentEating Disorders 305
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
attachment dimensions [ 37]. Alongside insecure attachment, identity development is
likely to be disrupted by other adverse childhood social experiences, such as childhood
maltreatment, teasing, bullying, or social exclusion [ 38].
Theory of Mind and Social Cognition
Problems related to understanding self and others have long been observed in patients
with AN and other eating disorders. There is evidence of a link between eating disorders
and specific problems in mentalizing. In a meta-analysis, both BN and AN were found to
be associated with significant deficits in ToM, which were more pronounced in the acute
phase of illness but also observable in individuals who had recovered from AN [ 39]. The
findings for AN were confirmed by further research [ 40]. It seems that both cognitive
perspective taking and decoding of mental states may be impaired in patients with eating
disorders [ 39]. Although in the acute phase of illness these impairments may be
attributable to the direct effects of starvation on the brain, there is evidence that
individuals with AN experience social difficulties premorbidly [ 41,42], and that these
difficulties persist after recovery from the eating disorder [ 43]. Measures of drive for
thinness, attachment, and quality of relationships suggest a substantial role for mentaliz-
ing and social cognition in eating disorders, even in individuals who are of normal
weight [ 44]. In a study designed to evaluate the interactions between objective measures
of mentalizing, empathy, and eating disorder symptomatology using a network analytic
approach, inference of cognitive mental states and shape concern were the nodes with the
highest centrality in the network [ 45]. A network analysis comprises a graphic repre-
sentation of potential contributing factors for a disorder or social process. As an analogy,
consider a stage with actors or groups of actors ( “nodes ”) on it, who are contributing to a
play —who or which group is center stage and contributing most to the theme of the play,
who do they relate to, and what is the strength of that relationship? In this study,
inference of emotional mental states was the node with the highest bridge strength in
the cluster of social cognition functions, highlighting the importance of mentalizing
abilities in that they contribute to the maintenance of eating disorder-related psycho-
pathology and to capacity for empathy. Using computer-administered measures of
mentalizing, empathy, and imitation (the degree to which observation of another ’s
actions prompts the performance of those actions by the observer), people with eating
disorders showed both hypermentalizing and hypomentalizing, and reduced accuracy of
emotional and cognitive mental-state inference, compared with a matched control group
of people without an eating disorder [ 46]. There was no difference in empathy between
the groups, but the group of individuals with eating disorders showed less imitation of
observed actions than the control group. Imitation is likely to be a distinct process that
reflects implicit rather than explicit mentalizing, although it is likely that the two interact
in determining everyday social competence [ 47,48]. As controlling for anxiety and
depressive symptoms did not remove these significant effects [ 46], the study suggests
that eating disorders may be directly linked to difficulties in mentalizing and social
imitation. Taken together, these emerging findings with objective measures provide a
reasonable indication that an intervention to strengthen mentalizing might help to
improve the social symptoms exhibited by patients with eating disorders.
In restrictive eating disorders, starvation may contribute to an apparent deficit in
social cognition via stress or other mechanisms [ 34]. This can serve as a motivation for306 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
maintaining low weight, because the avoidance or suppression of emotions helps to
avoid conflict [ 43]. As is observed clinically, patients with AN show fear and avoidance
of intense emotions, and it is possible that they may maintain a low body weight in order
to avoid these emotions. The observation of avoidance of emotion and poor ToM in
patients with eating disorders has led to the identification of features that are shared by
autism and eating disorders [ 49], although the common ground is an overlap of
problems in social cognition, and may not implicate many of those with eating disorders
[50]. The predisposition to social withdrawal may be driven both by problems in social
cognition and by the adverse emotional experience that these problems create, which is
addressed through eating disorder symptomatology.
Social Self-Regulation in Eating Disorders
Hundreds of studies have measured constructs such as attachment, social communi-
cation, perception and understanding of self and others, and social dominance in people
with eating disorders (for a review, see [ 34]). The findings, which are summarized in
Box 12.1 , are consistent with the hypothesis that a core dysfunction in eating disorders is
related to the regulation and management of a social and emotional self.
Of course, these limitations of social self-regulation, especially the deficit in emo-
tional expression and lack of reciprocation of warmth, have an impact on others, who are
likely to respond aversively and thus reinforce the pressure on social cognition and the
desire for social isolation. Difficulties in emotional mentalizing in individuals with eating
disorders have been shown to be associated with increased loneliness [ 46]. This supports
the contribution of socio-cognitive impairment to the perceived poor quality of relation-
ships that people with eating disorders have with their friends and relatives, and can lead
to social exclusion and isolation, which is a defining facet of these disorders.Box 12.1 Summary of findings which suggest that regulation of the social self or the
emotional self is a core component of eating disorders.
Social Self
/C15Negative self-evaluation.
/C15Self-absorbing rumination.
/C15Misalignment in social reciprocity.
/C15Interpersonal distrust and conflictual interaction.
/C15Low spontaneous social narrative.
/C15Problems in identifying the social salience of stimuli.
/C15Heightened sensitivity to threat in social situations (e.g., social comparison, social-
rank cues).
Emotional Self
/C15Difficulties in recognizing complex emotions.
/C15Poor expression and regulation of emotion.
/C15Difficulties in identifying and describing one ’s own emotions.
/C15Problems with mentalizing others ’emotions.
/C15Low capacity to manage negative emotions.
/C15Low trait emotional intelligence.Eating Disorders 307
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The Epistemic Mistrust Model of Eating Disorders: A Summary
Our developmental hypothesis about eating disorders starts with expectations based on
normal development. To summarize briefly, being mentalized in the context of an attach-
ment relationship generates epistemic trust, which in turn drives the ability to form and
learn from social connections. Epistemic trust is key to social living, as it underpins the
ability to reappraise oneself and adapt to one ’s social context via mentalizing and, where
necessary, to repair, preserve, develop, and increase social connections, interpersonal under-
standing, and cooperation throughout life. Such openness to the (social) environment is
usually adaptive, but in the context of adversity, epistemic hypervigilance may be equally
adaptive. We assume that although epistemic hypervigilance is not a mental health issue, it is
a potential source of vulnerability, as it reduces opportunities to benefit from social learning
and diminishes the quality of social exchange that normally enhances mentalizing. This
matters, as mentalizing helps individuals to step beyond the micro-trauma that accompanies
all social existence. In other words, whereas epistemic trust generates resilience, epistemic
mistrust may reduce an individual ’s ability to mentalize and to absorb the random shocks of
social living by creating epistemic distance between them and their (benign) social context.
The primary task of adolescence is the creation of a social network that can take advantage of
the input of trusted others —both peers and elders. When the capacity to form bonds of trust
is impaired, due to either predisposition (insecure attachment, social deprivation, social
constraints, or other structural or individual reasons) or acute pressures on maintaining
social connectedness (stress, shame, and social withdrawal), or both, the social network
becomes weakened and may collapse catastrophically, leaving the individual in social
isolation, with limited opportunity to recover mentalizing. In this non-mentalizing state
there is an increased likelihood that they will experience the internal and external world with
the exaggerated intensity of psychic equivalence and its counterpart —the meaninglessness
and emptiness of pretend mode with the tendency to dissociation. To gain control and social
self-regulation, teleological/action/ “Outside-In ”strategies may represent the only realistic
response. However, these strategies —such as restricting, bingeing, or obsessively avoiding
certain types of foods —generate their own problems.
We suggest that the range of different symptoms associated with eating disorders may
share the common function of being attempts at social self-regulation. Genetic predis-
position, early attachment history, adversity in childhood and adolescence (e.g., rejection,
physical or verbal abuse), and social messages regarding body weight and shape all
contribute to the intense experiences of shame associated with eating disorders, which
can not only serve to intensify competitive attitudes and striving for perfection, but also
increase the desire to avoid social participation. Shame leads to psychological social
withdrawal or disengagement from a mentalizing community. When mentalizing is
disavowed, psychic equivalence intensifies the experience of shame, which comes to be
experienced as destructive to the self. In individuals with restricting eating disorders such
as AN, the experience of excessive shame may drive a focus on greater internalization of
beauty ideals (as a standard for defining the self ), body image, and weight control. This is a
teleological attempt to prevent (in line with cultural messaging) the envisioned negative
social outcomes that are non-consciously conceptualized as catastrophic and permanent
social exclusion. When this teleological manipulation is successful, the individual may
experience pride (which again is intensified by psychic equivalence), which reinforces the
beliefs and feelings that initiated the actions (e.g., restricted eating), because it avoids the308 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
negative experience of shame. When the self-control fails and the observable outcome is
unsuccessful, the shame is intensified, along with the social withdrawal. Shame builds a
wall of social exclusion, which undermines the potential for social learning and cognitive
change that could modify the social experience of the self. In compassion-focused therapy
this is often referred to as a “shame –pride cycle ”[51].
Social self-regulation has similar effects in binge eating disorder, where non-
mentalized experiences of shame generate emotional instability in interpersonal contexts.
Bingeing is the teleological/action/ “Outside-In ”response which provides the emotion
regulation that the individual ’s mentalizing capacity is unable to provide. It reduces the
experience of shame and creates a pretend state (a “mental bubble ”) that psychologically
distances the individual from the intense negative emotional experiences through (ultim-
ately) dissociation. However, binge eating is not an effective way of managing shame, as
bingeing itself has the potential to generate shame, creating the same epistemic distance
between the individual and their social context that eating disorders characterized by
restricted eating can generate. The psychological social withdrawal will then create the
same persistent pattern of behavior that is inaccessible to change because social learning
is closed down by epistemic mistrust.
The mentalizing model suggests that people with eating disorders may be able to
achieve remarkable feats of self-regulation (e.g., self-starvation) but are still at a loss
when attempting to regulate their social (presentational) self. This is where the vicious
cycle that we have just described may explain the persistence of difficulties in eating
disorders. A mentalizing (social-cognitive) vulnerability triggers epistemic mistrust,
which in turn triggers social withdrawal and will create a further mentalizing problem,
ultimately generating epistemic hypervigilance and making the patient inaccessible to
cognitive change. The non-mentalizing, teleological world created by the patient inevit-
ably leads to distress in others who are close to the patient. These close others become
critical figures outside demanding that the patient changes their behavior, not realizing
that these demands paradoxically serve only to enhance and maintain the patient ’s social
self-regulation and experience of self-stabilization.
The MBT-ED Treatment Model
The General MBT-ED Approach
The MBT approach recognizes that vulnerability factors for eating disorders (e.g., attach-
ment insecurity, adversity, dysfunctional personality traits such as perfectionism) are not
appropriate targets for intervention, which instead needs to focus on interpersonal factors
that maintain eating disorders, as discussed earlier (see also [ 27]). Among these, as in the
case of other severe mental health problems, we consider dysfunction of relationships and
of the self to be the most important. We do not know for sure whether problems with
mentalizing are associated with attachment disorganization and precede the development
of eating disorders, or whether mentalizing difficulties emerge as part of the complex and
cyclical relational issues that lead to the symptoms of eating disorders. It is improbable that
the behaviors associated with eating disorders (e.g., self-starvation, frequent binge eating
and vomiting) would not compromise a higher cognitive function such as mentalizing.
Regardless of its role in the etiology of eating disorders, ineffective mentalizing is, from our
perspective, the key factor in the maintenance of these disorders. MBT-ED focuses onEating Disorders 309
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
facilitating improvements in mentalizing while also addressing —as in all of the implemen-
tations of MBT described in this book —the physical constraints of the patient ’s life, such as
housing, employment, physical risk, mental health risk, and symptoms of the disorder
interfering with the process of treatment.
To summarize, MBT interventions for patients with eating disorders focus on:
/C15supporting the mentalizing of emotions
/C15improving the mentalizing capacities needed for social processing while avoiding
pretend mode
/C15using MBT techniques to address psychic equivalence, which generates the
characteristic inflexible “black-and-white ”thinking style of exaggerated certainty
/C15addressing the rewarding experiences associated with the outcomes of teleological
thinking leading to self-reinforcing behaviors (e.g., positive beliefs about the value of
dysfunctional eating)
/C15working to reduce the epistemic hypervigilance and extreme epistemic mistrust in
relation to family members and other people who are assumed to be personally close
to the patient, to improve the patient ’s communication style with these individuals.
In contrast to both family therapy and cognitive –behavioral therapy, weight and
shape concerns are not the target of intervention in MBT-ED. MBT assumes that
unmentalized content is poorly addressed by direct attempts to mentalize it (e.g.,
searching for the meaning of thinness, addressing distorted cognitions). The fundamen-
tal deficit is assumed to be relational —that is, the disruption of the social connection
between the person with an eating disorder and their social environment, which is both
the consequence and the cause of their mentalizing difficulties.
Part of the reason for poor outcomes in patients with eating disorders is the ego-
syntonicity of the presentation —it includes ideas and features that are comfortable for the
patient but create distress in those who are close to them. The mentalizing model of BPD is
relevant here. We assume that one aspect of the self-dysfunction that is characteristic of
eating disorders can be described as the disorganization created by an alien self [ 17]( s e e
earlier in this chapter, and also Chapters 2 and10). This construct, which owes much to
the psychoanalytic origins of MBT, suggests that self-hatred and ego-destructive shame can
arise through a process similar to identification with the aggressor, where the individual
identifies with an external persecutor to the point of experiencing the criticism and shame
as coming from within the self, thus threatening the integrity of the self. This is dealt with
by externalizing the “alien ”part of the self, and generating experiences in which the feeling
of being criticized and attacked seems to come from outside rather than from within. In
this way the self is protected. A dynamic is created that stabilizes the self and in which,
paradoxically, reducing external criticism would expose the self to a far more painful and
uncontrollable internal attack. Thus there is minimal intrinsic motivation for recovery, as
that would remove the illusion that the destructive parts of the self are not within but
outside, as evidenced by the external critical voices around the patient. In MBT-ED, the
clinician has to tread a fine line between accepting how things are and insisting on change.
Their empathic, respectful, and accepting tone is essential to avoid collusion with the
critical voices, which are a creation of the patient and serve to stabilize the patient ’s
dysfunctional self. Sometimes this may be quite an effort, as the patient ’st e l e o l o g i c a lm o d e
of triggering actions in others may leave the clinician vulnerable to becoming hypercritical
and demanding, and so reinforcing the patient ’s resistance to recovery.310 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
MBT-ED is a relatively flexible treatment, which is adapted to the needs of the
individual patient with the aim of enhancing their agency by directly involving them
in determining the focus of the therapy. In the introductory phase of the intervention
(MBT-I, described later in this chapter; for a description of MBT-I in general, see also
Chapter 4 ), patients can choose items from the manual that they consider most relevant
to them, or add items that they think would make the process more pertinent to their
thinking about mental states. In MBT-ED, every opportunity is taken to encourage
patients to make choices, create personal routes, and engage in active problem solving
and decision making in relation to their own care, and also to give the patient a sense of
efficacy and reduce the likelihood of them disengaging and dropping out of treatment.
At the core of all forms of MBT is the mentalizing of thoughts and feelings. In child
and adolescent implementations of MBT, practical tasks are often used to enhance
mentalizing (outlined in Chapters 13 –15; see also [ 52–55]). MBT-ED also includes
drawing and writing to support the enhancement of mentalizing. Drawing, writing,
and other practical interventions may be considered “epistemic workarounds. ”In con-
texts of epistemic hypervigilance and mistrust in communication, the use of playful and
concrete non-verbal approaches fosters thinking in mental-state terms. They offer the
potential to make unaccustomed links and connections and perceive new perspectives,
and can trigger cognitive (re-)structuring and reduce habitual defensiveness.
Importantly, they can bypass the wish to avoid emotions, and they can engage creativity
and contribute to the generation of fresh relational solutions.
MBT-ED is, by necessity, an identity-building approach. As we outlined earlier in this
chapter, social self-regulation is a core problem in patients with eating disorders because,
with limited mentalizing capacity, the patient ’s identity is too weak to support a stable
sense of self that is capable of resisting the pressures of diverse social influences, and the
patient has achieved stability by social withdrawal, at the cost of further limitations of
mentalizing. In MBT-ED, a focus on creating an identity independent of the highly valued
ego-syntonic nature of the current identity, which integrates valued aspects of the illness
(e.g., teleological beliefs about body weight and shape), is a priority throughout treatment.
The clinician generates role models with the patient so that they can create identifications
with thoughts and feelings that are free from illness-driven beliefs and values.
The structure of MBT-ED has been described in detail by Robinson and Skårderud
[1,56]. In keeping with the core model of MBT, they emphasize the importance of a good
formulation of the disorder in mentalizing terms. They suggest that MBT-ED should be
designed as a long-term program combining individual therapy, group therapy, group
psychoeducation, and the active use of written case formulations. Medical management
is a necessary part of the program, especially when it is offered as part of an inpatient,
day-hospital, or intensive outpatient treatment, as patients with eating disorders can
require regular physical assessment. The mentalizing principles used in organizing the
multidisciplinary intervention AMBIT ([ 57]; see also Chapter 17 ) should be used when
working with doctors, dietitians, nurses, and psychologists as part of running the
treatment program. This mentalizing approach to systems of care considers how to
divide responsibility among professionals, and how to support mentalized communi-
cation between them, to try to prevent the fragmentation of a helping system that works
best when it is integrated, holding together a therapeutic process in the face of frequently
encountered medical or mental health crises (e.g., suicide attempts, increased frequency
of self-harm).Eating Disorders 311
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
F o r m u l a t i o ni nM B T - E D
The MBT model in all its clinical contexts requires a formulation of the patient ’s current
problems, using the patient ’s impaired mentalizing as a touchstone for the understand-
ing of their current experience. The formulation should include the patient ’s history and
current situation, key factors relevant to the clinical picture, a presentation of hypotheses
about critical challenges, and a proposal of a plan for treatment, including anticipated
obstacles and challenges in therapy (for a more detailed description of the development
of a formulation, see Chapter 4 ). Specific to the context of eating disorders, the
formulation should include the following information about the patient:
/C15their understanding of their situation
/C15their beliefs about their eating disorder and the value it has for them
/C15the attitude of key others in relation to their presentation
/C15their physical (embodied mentalizing) experiences
/C15the interpersonal conflicts of which they are aware, and their attitudes to these
conflicts
/C15their strengths and weaknesses in mentalizing, and how these could relate to the
issues described in the preceding points.
The formulation should draw attention to the difficulties in social self-regulation that
are experienced by the patient, and their ways of coping with life ’s ordinary interpersonal
challenges, which create thoughts and feelings that they struggle to manage. It should
also include the contextualization of the eating disorder and the way it is seen by the
patient as a solution to these challenges. The formulation ends with the clinician ’s
highlighting of expected challenges in both individual and group MBT.
The formulation in MBT is constructed by the clinician with the patient. It is written
(or drawn) by the clinician and then given to the patient for them to check and correct.
This process can go through a number of cycles of amendment until the formulation
becomes a jointly constructed document. The formulation should be neither too long
nor too superficial. Initially, one written page may be enough, and even a single diagram
outlining the pathway to low mentalizing and eating problems can be sufficient to
orient treatment. Attention should be paid to making sure that patients can recognize
themselves in the description. It should be prepared during the first phase of therapy
(usually the first month of treatment). The formulation should be optimistic in the sense
that it gives equal weight to understanding the patient ’s difficulties and highlighting their
strengths, as well as ways in which MBT-ED could help to address problems that are
particularly painful for the patient. The patient ’s general mentalizing in the past and the
present, and how the experience of their eating disorder can make mentalizing difficult,
are outlined. Aspects of the disorder (e.g., concern about low body weight and/or shape)
that impede the patient ’s mentalizing and have effects on the symptoms themselves and
on the patient ’s interpersonal relationships need to be set out in the formulation.
Many important aspects of the patient ’s history, including their relationships with
family members and romantic/sexual relationships, are unlikely to be included in the
initial formulation, although they may turn out to be critical to the therapy. The
formulation is a “live”document and should be returned to and modified during the
course of the treatment.312 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Individual Therapy
The mainstay of MBT-ED is individual therapy. This is delivered according to the
general model of MBT (as outlined in Chapters 3 and 4), with attention given to the
specific objectives of MBT-ED. If individual therapy and group therapy (described later
in this chapter) are both offered, particular emphasis is placed on openness between the
different treatment contexts. For example, the secretiveness that is typically associated
with eating disorders makes it necessary for the individual clinician to be informed about
the patient ’s ways of functioning in the group. Given the emphasis on social self-
regulation in the MBT-ED model, the individual sessions offer an opportunity to provide
one-to-one support for the emergence (in the social context of the group sessions) of
identity, understanding of emotions, social presentation, perspective taking, and epi-
stemic trust. In this way, individual therapy takes some of its key materials from the
patient ’s experience in group therapy.
Clinical Example: Increasing Reflection on Self and Other Experience within
Relationships, Identifying Affect, and Avoiding Pretend Mode
CLINICIAN :You were saying your friends are worried about you. How does that affect you?
MARY:I just see them as saying that. It does not mean much to me. There is nothing to worry about.
I tell them that.
CLINICIAN :Hmm ...but I was wondering about how it affects your relationship with them, rather
than that they do not need to worry.
MARY:I don ’t really understand why they worry. I feel fine and they don ’t have to look after me.
CLINICIAN :So, describe how you feel with them when they are worrying about you.
MARY:I think they do not know who I am. I am on my own at that point.
CLINICIAN :Ah, so you are with them in person but they don ’t see you as you see yourself? (The
clinician is trying to focus on the mismatch between self-experience and others ’experience of Mary,
and her consequent social and relational loneliness.)
MARY:I am OK, but I am on my own I suppose. (The clinician needs to be alert for pretend mode here,
as Mary perhaps agrees too readily.)
CLINICIAN :You suppose? (A mild challenge is given.)
MARY:I am with them but we are not close generally, and I do watch from the sidelines and try to
fit in.
CLINICIAN :Something passed across your eyes as you said that. Can you say what it was? (The
clinician is establishing an affect state if possible.)
MARY:I suddenly felt upset about something.
CLINICIAN :Can you say what it was?
MARY:A shiver that there was no one else in the world and that people were just worrying about me
when there is nothing to worry about.Eating Disorders 313
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
CLINICIAN :I wonder what it would be like if they stopped worrying? (This counterfactual question is
offered as a mild challenge.)
MARY:It would never happen.
CLINICIAN :Do the people in the group worry about you?
The clinician now tries to work on this central dynamic of Mary ’s relationships, and begins
to explore whether the same dynamic is activated in the group psychotherapy sessions.
Some patients are reluctant to expose themselves socially in groups, whereas others
embrace the group experience not as a social challenge but rather as a way of maintaining
their “secret identity, ”and use the group as a shield behind which they are able to hide in
plain sight, staying silent and contributing little or nothing beyond superficial support to
other group members, thereby hiding their social withdrawal and general passivity.
Paradoxically, they experience individual therapy as providing fewer places to hide
because of its focus on their identity, which creates more anxiety for them.
Group Therapy
Unsurprisingly, group therapy can be the most stressful part of MBT-ED for the majority
of patients. The vulnerability of the self is greatest when it is exposed to potential social
scrutiny, and these patients carefully craft their identity to avoid social exposure in which
their thoughts, feelings, and true ambitions could be exposed and catastrophic humiliation
could follow. Their preoccupation with others ’ideas about their physical appearance and
mental states makes them feel vulnerable, and they can experience deep mental pain in
relation to persecutory patterns of interaction with others who may themselves use group
interactions to stabilize their own unstable self through aggressive interactions with group
members. The group context inevitably has the potential to activate the core pathology of
eating disorders, which highlights our assumption that ultimately these disorders are
disorders of self-function. We do not know whether group sessions are either a necessary
or a sufficient element of MBT-ED, but it is certain that they do carry a risk of iatrogenic
harm. They may set up dynamics that can, on the surface, appear mutually supportive but
in fact consist of all the group members hiding from each other in pretend mode;
alternatively, the group can become a gathering of people who are all stabilizing themselves
through mutual criticism of each other. The MBT group treatment for BPD (see
Chapter 5 ) therefore needs to be adapted to the context of eating disorders, with clinicians
being particularly vigilant about the patients ’characteristic styles of interaction.
Psychoeducational Groups
Psychoeducational groups, as in the MBT-I groups for BPD patients (see Chapter 4 ),
serve as an introduction to the mentalizing perspective on eating disorders. MBT-I for
eating disorders (MBT-I-ED) orients the patients to the MBT treatment model and
facilitates their understanding of the clinical process. Eight to ten sessions are devoted
to this introduction. These group sessions are focused on individual topics relevant to the
model, which are presented by a clinician. The subjects include the nature of mentaliz-
ing, with perhaps a greater emphasis on communication than in MBT-I for BPD, in view314 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
of the avoidant tendencies of many patients with eating disorders. Misunderstandings,
difficulties in “reading ”other people, and difficulties in knowing oneself are considered
at length. The strategy for engaging patients includes a didactic style that requires
contributions from the patients, who provide examples and present alternative perspec-
tives on issues from their personal history to illustrate particular points. Discussion
deliberately often remains at quite a high level as the topics themselves can be stressful, as
is the experience of being in the group (as outlined earlier). The language used in the
sessions is simple, and the examples brought by the clinician should be from other
patients with eating disorders from their own clinical experience. These can trigger
emotional reactions in the participants. For this reason, the clinician tries to maintain
a light-hearted attitude throughout the MBT-I-ED course. In-depth explorations of
personal experience are discouraged during these sessions. The aim is not to allow
discussions to become too “hot”or emotionally intense, and also to ensure that these
group encounters are quite different from the weekly group therapy.
In a randomized controlled trial of MBT-ED compared with specialist supportive
clinical management [ 6], MBT-I-ED (five sessions) took place before the main part of
MBT-ED, which constituted weekly individual and group sessions over 12 months.
Patients with co-occurring BPD and eating disorders were difficult to retain in this
program, so it is possible that the “dosage ”of MBT-I-ED sessions followed by both group
and individual sessions is not ideal. In patients with eating disorders and co-occurring
personality disorders, it is likely that attendance at both individual and group sessions may
be possible only in a day-hospital context. It is also likely that 12 months is insufficient
time for the combined treatment of BPD and eating disorders. On this basis, it may be
advisable to follow the lead of the MBT program for BPD and offer 18 months of MBT-
ED, the first 3 months of which consists of psychoeducational MBT-I-ED.
Concluding Remarks
T h e r ei sc o n s i d e r a b l ee v i d e n c eo fm e n t a l i zing problems in patients with eating dis-
orders. Psychic equivalence t hinking, teleological mode, and pretend mode dominate,
especially in relation to the individual ’s body weight and shape. The mentalizing
model assumes the existence of developmental vulnerabilit ies, especially during ado-
lescence, and that the range of different symptoms associated with eating disorders
may have the common function of being attempts at social self-regulation.
A combined program of individual and gro up psychotherapy is offered in MBT-ED
to address social anxieties while due a ttention is paid to any physical problems
resulting from the eating disorder. The co re foci of MBT-ED are social and relational
adaptation, improving low mentalizing triggered as part of a retreat from social
interaction, and sup porting resilience.
References
1. Robinson P, Skårderud F. Eating disorders.
In: Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds. Handbook of
Mentalizing in Mental Health Practice ,2 n d
ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Publishing, 2019; 369 –86.2. Schmidt U, Wade TD, Treasure J. The
Maudsley Model of Anorexia Nervosa
Treatment for Adults (MANTRA):
development, key features, and
preliminary evidence. J Cogn Psychother
2014; 28:4 8–71.Eating Disorders 315
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
3. National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence. Eating Disorders: Recognition
and Treatment . London, UK: National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence;
2017. www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng69 .
4. Esterling BA, L ’Abate L, Murray EJ,
Pennebaker JW. Empirical foundations for
writing in prevention and psychotherapy:
mental and physical health outcomes.
Clin Psychol Rev 1999; 19:7 9–96.
5. Miller WR, Rollnick S. Motivational
Interviewing: Helping People Change , 3rd
ed. New York, NY: The Guilford Press,
2012.
6. Robinson P, Hellier J, Barrett B et al. The
N O U R I S H E Dr a n d o m i s e dc o n t r o l l e dt r i a l
comparing mentalisation-based treatment
for eating disorders (MBT-ED) with
specialist supportive clinical management
(SSCM-ED) for patients with eating
disorders and symp toms of borderline
personality disorder. Trials 2016; 17:5 4 9 .
7. Bruch H. Eating Disorders. Obesity,
Anorexia Nervosa, and the Person Within .
New York, NY: Basic Books, 1973.
8. Bruch H. Four decades of eating disorders.
In: Garner DM, Garfinkel PE, eds.
Handbook of Psychotherapy for Anorexia
Nervosa and Bulimia .N e wY o r k ,N Y :T h e
Guilford Press, 1985; 7 –18.
9. Shai D, Belsky J. When words just won ’t
do: introducing parental embodied
mentalizing. Child Dev Perspect 2011; 5:
173–80.
10. Shai D, Fonagy P. Beyond words: parental
embodied mentalizing and the parent-
infant dance. In: Mechanisms of Social
Connection: From Brain to Group .
Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association, 2014; 185 –203.
11. Shai D, Dollberg D, Szepsenwol O. The
importance of parental verbal and
embodied mentalizing in shaping
parental experiences of stress and
coparenting. Infant Behav Dev 2017; 49:
87–96.
12. Afek E, Lev-Wiesel R, Federman D, Shai
D. The mediating role of parental
embodied mentalizing in the longitudinal
association between prenatal spousalsupport and toddler emotion recognition.
Infancy 2022; 27: 609 –29.
13. Vaever MS, Cordes K, Stuart AC et al.
Associations of maternal sensitivity and
embodied mentalizing with infant-
mother attachment security at one year in
depressed and non-depressed dyads.
Attach Hum Dev 2022; 24: 115 –32.
14. Shai D, Belsky J. Parental embodied
mentalizing: how the nonverbal dance
between parents and infants predicts
children ’s socio-emotional functioning.
Attach Hum Dev 2017; 19: 191 –219.
15. Garset-Zamani S, Cordes K, Shai D et al.
Does postpartum depression affect
parental embodied mentalizing in
mothers with 4-months old infants?
Infant Behav Dev 2020; 61: 101486.
16. Fonagy P, Gergely G, Jurist E, Target M.
Affect Regulation, Mentalization, and the
Development of the Self . New York, NY:
Other Press, 2002.
17. Fonagy P, Target M. Attachment and
reflective function: their role in self-
organization. Dev Psychopathol 1997; 9:
679–700.
18. Fonagy P, Target M. Playing with reality:
III. The persistence of dual psychic reality
in borderline patients. Int J Psychoanal
2000; 81: 853 –73.
19. Arnsten AF. Stress signalling pathways
that impair prefrontal cortex structure
and function. Nat Rev Neurosci 2009; 10:
410–22.
20. Steinhausen HC. The outcome of
anorexia nervosa in the 20th century. Am
J Psychiatry 2002; 159: 1284 –93.
21. Eddy KT, Tabri N, Thomas JJ et al.
Recovery from anorexia nervosa and
bulimia nervosa at 22-year follow-up.
J Clin Psychiatry 2017; 78: 184 –9.
22. Treasure J, Willmott D, Ambwani S et al.
Cognitive interpersonal model for
anorexia nervosa revisited: the
perpetuating factors that contribute to the
development of the severe and enduring
illness. J Clin Med 2020; 9: 630.
23. Luyten P, Campbell C, Allison E, Fonagy
P. The mentalizing approach to316 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
psychopathology: state of the art and
future directions. Annu Rev Clin Psychol
2020; 16: 297 –325.
24. Sekowski M, Gambin M, Cudo A et al.
The relations between childhood
maltreatment, shame, guilt, depression
and suicidal ideation in inpatient
adolescents. J Affect Disord 2020; 276:
667–77.
25. Fonagy P. The feeling that destroys the
self: the role of mentalizing in the
catastrophic sequelae of shame. In: The
Problem of Shame: The 2019 John
M. Oldham National Mental Health
Symposium . Houston, TX: Menninger,
2019. www.menningerclinic.org/Assets/
2019-menninger-symposium-
emailwebsite-version.pdf .
26. Schmidt U, Treasure J. Anorexia nervosa:
valued and visible. A cognitive-
interpersonal maintenance model and its
implications for research and practice. Br
J Clin Psychol 2006; 45: 343 –66.
27. Treasure J, Schmidt U. The cognitive-
interpersonal maintenance model of
anorexia nervosa revisited: a summary of
the evidence for cognitive, socio-
emotional and interpersonal predisposing
and perpetuating factors. J Eat Disord
2013; 1: 13.
28. Tchanturia K, Hambrook D, Curtis H
et al. Work and social adjustment in
patients with anorexia nervosa. Compr
Psychiatry 2013; 54:4 1–5.
29. Castellini G, Rossi E, Ricca V. The
relationship between eating disorder
psychopathology and sexuality: etiological
factors and implications for treatment.
Curr Opin Psychiatry 2020; 33: 554 –61.
30. Schulte-Ruther M, Mainz V, Fink GR
et al. Theory of mind and the brain in
anorexia nervosa: relation to treatment
outcome. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry 2012; 51: 832 –41.e11.
31. Westwood H, Kerr-Gaffney J, Stahl D,
Tchanturia K. Alexithymia in eating
disorders: systematic review and meta-
analyses of studies using the Toronto
Alexithymia Scale. J Psychosom Res 2017;
99:6 6–81.32. Dolan SC, Khindri R, Franko DL et al.
Anhedonia in eating disorders: a meta-
analysis and systematic review. Int J Eat
Disord 2022; 55: 161 –75.
33. Jewell T, Collyer H, Gardner T et al.
Attachment and mentalization and their
association with child and adolescent
eating pathology: a systematic review. Int
J Eat Disord 2016; 49: 354 –73.
34. Caglar-Nazali HP, Corfield F, Cardi V
et al. A systematic review and meta-
analysis of ‘Systems for Social Processes ’
in eating disorders. Neurosci Biobehav
Rev2014; 42:5 5–92.
35. Faber A, Dube L, Knauper B. Attachment
and eating: a meta-analytic review of the
relevance of attachment for unhealthy
and healthy eating behaviors in the
general population. Appetite 2018; 123:
410–38.
36. Cortes-Garcia L, Takkouche B, Seoane G,
Senra C. Mediators linking insecure
attachment to eating symptoms: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.
PLoS ONE 2019; 14: e0213099.
37. Jewell T, Apostolidou E, Sadikovic K,
et al. Attachment in individuals with
eating disorders compared to community
controls: a systematic review and meta ‐
analysis. Int J Eat Disord 2023. https://doi
.org/10.1002/eat.23922
38. Vartanian LR, Hayward LE, Smyth JM
et al. Risk and resiliency factors related to
body dissatisfaction and disordered
eating: the identity disruption model. Int
J Eat Disord 2018; 51: 322 –30.
39. Bora E, Kose S. Meta-analysis of theory of
mind in anorexia nervosa and bulimia
nervosa: a specific impairment of
cognitive perspective taking in anorexia
nervosa? Int J Eat Disord 2016; 49:
739–40.
40. Leppanen J, Sedgewick F, Treasure J,
Tchanturia K. Differences in the Theory
of Mind profiles of patients with anorexia
nervosa and individuals on the autism
spectrum: a meta-analytic review.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2018; 90: 146 –63.
41. Cardi V, Tchanturia K, Treasure J.
Premorbid and illness-related socialEating Disorders 317
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
difficulties in eating disorders: an
overview of the literature and treatment
developments. Curr Neuropharmacol
2018; 16: 1122 –30.
42. Troop NA, Bifulco A. Childhood social
arena and cognitive sets in eating
disorders. Br J Clin Psychol 2002; 41:
205–11.
43. Oldershaw A, Lavender T, Sallis H et al.
Emotion generation and regulation in
anorexia nervosa: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of self-report data. Clin
Psychol Rev 2015; 39:8 3–95.
44. Rothschild-Yakar L, Levy-Shiff R,
Fridman-Balaban R et al. Mentalization
and relationships with parents as
predictors of eating disordered behavior.
J Nerv Ment Dis 2010; 198: 501 –7.
45. Monteleone AM, Corsi E, Cascino G et al.
The interaction between mentalizing,
empathy and symptoms in people with
eating disorders: a network analysis
integrating experimentally induced and
self-report measures. Cognit Ther Res
2020; 44: 1140 –49.
46. Corsi E, Cardi V, Sowden S et al. Socio-
cognitive processing in people with eating
disorders: computerized tests of
mentalizing, empathy and imitation skills.
Int J Eat Disord 2021; 54: 1509 –18.
47. Bird G, Viding E. The self to other model
of empathy: providing a new framework
for understanding empathy impairments
in psychopathy, autism, and alexithymia.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2014; 47: 520 –32.
48. Happe F, Frith U. Annual research
review: towards a developmental
neuroscience of atypical social cognition.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2014; 55:
553–7.
49. Saure E, Laasonen M, Lepisto-Paisley T
et al. Characteristics of autism spectrumdisorders are associated with longer
duration of anorexia nervosa: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Int J Eat Disord
2020; 53: 1056 –79.
50. Kinnaird E, Norton C, Stewart C,
Tchanturia K. Same behaviours, different
reasons: what do patients with co-
occurring anorexia and autism want from
treatment? Int Rev Psychiatry 2019; 31:
308–17.
51. Goss K, Gilbert P. Eating disorders,
shame and pride: a cognitive-behavioural
functional analysis. In: Gilbert P, Miles J,
eds.Body Shame: Conceptualisation,
Research and Treatment . Hove, UK:
Routledge, 2014; 233 –69.
52. Asen E, Fonagy P. Mentalization-Based
Treatment with Families . New York, NY:
The Guilford Press, 2021.
53. Midgley N, Ensink K, Lindqvist K et al.
Mentalization-Based Treatment for
Children: A Time-Limited Approach .
Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association, 2017.
54. Rossouw T, Wiwe M, Vrouva I, eds.
Mentalization-Based Treatment for
Adolescents: A Practical Treatment Guide .
Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2021.
55. Midgley N, Vrouva I, eds. Minding the
Child: Mentalization-Based Interventions
with Children, Young People and Their
Families . Hove, UK: Routledge, 2013.
56. Robinson P, Skårderud F, Sommerfeldt B.
Hunger: Mentalisation Based Treatments
for Eating Disorders . Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2019.
57. Bevington D, Fuggle P, Cracknell L,
Fonagy P. Adaptive Mentalization-Based
Integrative Treatment: A Guide for Teams
to Develop Systems of Care . Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2017.318 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 403 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part IV
Chapter
13Application of Mentalization-Based Treatment in
Different Populations and in Different Settings
Working with Children
Introduction
An important way in which mentalization-based treatment (MBT) has been adapted for
children has been in the development of MBT-C by Nick Midgley and his colleagues [ 1].
Although there is good evidence for cognitive –behavioral interventions for children,
many children may not be able to make full use of cognitive –behavioral strategies if they
do not have the necessary self-regulatory or cognitive strengths. Midgley and his
colleagues realized that a model that integrated mentalizing, attachment, and a psycho-
dynamic approach might provide a valuable additional treatment option for children and
families. MBT-C is a time-limited program (usually 12 weeks) for children between the
ages of about 5 and 10 years, which has an emphasis on supporting the development of
mentalizing. It is considered an appropriate approach for many mental health difficul-
ties, including conduct and behavioral problems and low mood and anxiety.
MBT-C does not seek to resolve all of the difficulties that a child might be experi-
encing, but aims to strengthen the child ’s emerging mentalizing —and the parents ’
capacity to scaffold their child ’s mentalizing —so that a process of change is initiated.
In doing this, MBT-C aims to increase the child ’s capacity for emotional regulation and
to support their parents to best meet the emotional needs of their children. This means
providing opportunities for parents and children to practice good mentalizing, and it
also involves paying attention to the situations in which mentalizing breaks down, and
working on areas where there are deficits in the capacity to mentalize. Midgley and his
colleagues suggest that this emphasis on mentalizing is supported by research which
shows that mentalizing abilities are associated with a “positive sense of self, healthy
relationships, and better emotional regulation ”(Midgley et al. [ 1], p. 6).
MBT-C involves working with parents to support their capacity to take a mentalizing
stance toward their children. The approach seeks to help parents to view their child as a
separate person with their own mind and experiences, and to enable the parents to
become more open to thinking about the mental states that might drive their child ’s
behavior. The parents are also encouraged to think about their own mental states and,
crucially, to think about how their own mental states and behaviors are seen by, and
affect, their child.
The standard format for MBT-C is 12 individual sessions that take place weekly with the
child, with separate sessions held with the parent(s). However, this format is flexible, as it may
need to be adjusted according to the setting or the needs of the children and parents: “What is
important is that the therapeutic contract is clear and coherent from the beginning —for the
parents, as well as for the child. This is a way of creating a sense of safety and collaboration,
and avoiding a scenario in which the therapist makes decisions that the family is unaware of.
319
blihd li b C bid  i i 
This transparency is part of the mentalizing stance, and contributes to a sense of shared
ownership of the therapeutic process ”(Midgley et al. [ 1], p. 252).
The Mentalizing Stance in MBT-C
In terms of technique, MBT-C is fundamentally informed by the mentalizing stance,
which is viewed throughout this book as core to all mentalizing-informed work. As with
any MBT approach, the experience of the richly mentalizing relationship, characterized
by empathic attunement, openness, and curiosity about mental states, is at the heart
of the intervention, rather than any specific techniques. The following extract is from a
clinical vignette described by Midgley and his colleagues in their book on MBT-C [ 1].
It is an account of a therapist ’s first meeting with Belinda, a 7-year-old girl who is
withdrawn, anxious, and struggling to make friends.
When the therapist first meets Belinda, he is struck by how little eye contact she makes. At their
first individual meeting, Belinda follows the therapist to the playroom but sits rather listlessly,
drawing circles on a piece of paper. When the therapist invites her to play a game of catch,
Belinda looks surprised, but accepts. She throws the ball a few times, but her coordination is poor,
and one of her throws knocks a plastic cup off the table on to the floor. Belinda glances quickly at
the therapist and appears scared. The therapist smiles at Belinda and gets down to floor level,
picking up the cup. “Don’tw o r r y —not broken ,”he says, and shows Belinda the cup. Then he goes
on:“Id o n’tk n o ww h a ty o u ’re like, but when I go somewhere new, I ’m always a bit nervous about
what people are going to think of me. I don ’tk n o wi ft h e y ’re going to like me or not .”
Belinda looks at the therapist with a bit of curiosity. “Know the feeling ?”he asks, but Belinda
doesn ’t reply. Instead, she picks up the ball, and they carry on playing catch. The therapist starts
adding in different tricks, and soon they are laughing. “Good catch! ”he says, when Belinda
reaches a ball that is quite high. And when he misses one and the soft ball bounces off Belinda ’s
nose, the therapist says, “Ouch! ”in a playful, somewhat exaggerated manner. “Did that hurt? ”
he asks, but Belinda shakes her head no.
(Midgley et al. [ 1], p. 85)
What is so well conveyed in this vignette is how lightly the therapist ’s stance is held, yet
it consistently involves empathy, authenticity, interest, positivity, and a non-judgmental
openness: “Belinda ’s therapist presents himself as an interested, well-disposed adult, who
engages with Belinda in a reciprocal way and shows interest in understanding how Belinda
is feeling. He is not a ‘blank screen ’but speaks about feelings and discloses a little of his
own personal experience and what goes on in his own mind ”(Midgley et al. [ 1], p. 86).
The therapist is warm and supportive rather than inscrutable or detached, but at the
same time he is not overly emotional or elaborate in his attempts at mentalizing, which
could be over-arousing for Belinda. Rather, the approach that the therapist uses is to
create a safe environment in which two minds can meet together in the room in a
regulated way, and can begin to think together about what is in those minds and how
they respond to each other.
Another clinical example captures how heightened affect and misunderstandings are
managed. This case involves Mohammed, a 7-year-old boy who is attending a session
after he got into trouble at school for physically attacking a classmate.
The therapist begins the session with Mohammed, who at first makes no reference to what had
happened that day but begins a game in which a doll is being picked on by all the other dolls. At
one point the doll kicks back and tells the others to go away. The therapist says, with some320 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
blihd li b C bid  i i 
feeling: “It seems like she wants them all to get out of her face! ”Mohammed turns round,
abruptly, and throws the doll toward the therapist ’s face, at the same time screaming at her,
“I hate you! I hate you! ”The therapist has not expected this and immediately moves backward,
away from Mohammed, breaking eye contact. As she does so, she says, “Mohammed, I ’m really
sorry. I ’m not quite sure what I ’ve done, but I can see that I ’ve really upset you. I ’m so sorry. ”At
that point, Mohammed bursts into tears.
(Midgley et al. [ 1], pp. 98 –9)
The therapist was genuinely surprised by Mohammed ’s reaction, but her first
response was to apologize for having behaved in a way that was so upsetting to him.
This response was to help to regulate Mohammed and acknowledge that something had
gone wrong between them. The therapist did not try to come up with a theory about
Mohammed ’s mental state at the time, but simply modeled a stance in which the
difficulty of understanding mental states (in this case the therapist ’s difficulty in relation
to Mohammed) was acknowledged, but not catastrophized.
MBT as a Play-Centered Approach
Play is at the heart of the MBT-C model. Fonagy and Target have suggested that play is
an antecedent of mentalizing [ 2–4]. There is evidence from research which indicates that
the capacity for pretend play is associated with improved reflective functioning (i.e.,
mentalizing); a study of children with a history of being sexually abused found that play
mediates the relationship between having experienced abuse and children ’s later mental-
izing capacity [ 5]. While a child is playing, the therapist can use various approaches to
improve the child ’s awareness of mental states. At its simplest, this can take the form of
describing the play process [ 6]. This is a process in which the therapist describes,
summarizes, and integrates the child ’s feelings, behaviors, and thoughts during their
play. A further step is for the therapist to then describe the child ’s behavior in terms of
their mental states, allowing them to touch on difficult thoughts or aspects of the child ’s
play that might feel too overwhelming to talk about. Midgley and his colleagues describe
various ways in which mentalizing and play can come together, and we shall summarize
these approaches in this section.
Stimulating the Play Narrative
For a child who is anxious, inhibited, or withdrawn in relation to their play, it may be
helpful for the therapist to ask questions, to help them to understand the story of the
play. “This technique is the first step to understanding the play context that the child is
presenting during the session and helps the therapist make sense of what is going on.
Additionally, this technique encourages the child to elaborate the stories presented
during the play through gentle inquiry about the material presented and by asking for
more details and descriptions ”(Midgley et al. [ 1], p. 136).
Midgley and his colleagues draw a parallel between this technique and the clarifica-
tion and exploration that are used in MBT for adults (described in Chapter 4 ).
Mentalizing the Play
With a child who is able to engage in symbolic play, the therapist can take the step of
mentalizing the narrative of the play . This means verbalizing the story of the play, andWorking with Children 321
blihd li b C bid  i i 
supporting greater exploration of the thoughts and ideas behind it. The therapist remains
cautious and wondering (not-knowing) about their description of the narrative, and
allows the child to elaborate or correct the therapist ’s account. The aim of this approach
is to stimulate mentalizing in a playful and undogmatic manner, allowing the introduc-
tion of different perspectives in a way that is respectful of both the play itself and the
child ’s own possible thoughts and feelings about it. A keen message that is conveyed in
this process is that the child ’s play is valued; their sense of agency and what they are
doing are treated as interesting, and the therapist engages with the play in a playful
way themselves.
Problems with Symbolic Play
Some children may not engage in symbolic play. Older children might feel that they have
grown out of pretend play and will be more interested in using drawing, painting, or clay
than engaging in symbolic play; board games can be another option for some children.
Younger children who cannot or will not engage in pretend play can be asked to join in
activities that are more body based —for example, throwing and catching a ball, sword
fighting, or playing music. Using clay or a sand box can be a valuable way into being
playful for children who are inhibited or unwilling to engage in symbolic play. All of
these games involve interaction, rhythm, and ritual, and allow experimentation with
different sensations and activities.
Pitching the Right Intervention for the Child, at the
Right Moment
An often repeated idea in this book is that when someone ’s mentalizing has gone
“offline, ”it is not helpful to seek to use an explicitly mentalizing response at that
moment. Instead, it is more helpful to reduce the patient ’s arousal, to show empathy,
and to validate the patient ’s experience. This applies in just the same way when working
with children. Almost inevitably there will be times when the therapist gets this wrong —
for example, they might introduce an intervention that is too demanding or explicitly
mentalizing at a moment that feels overwhelming or makes the child feel misunderstood.
The task of the therapist at such moments is to be honest and apologetic about their
misattunement, as we saw in the clinical example of Mohammed earlier in this chapter.
Mirroring and Contingent Responding
Children who are chaotic and who seem disorganized in their responses and unregulated
in their actions are often referred for behavioral difficulties. These children seem to lack
the foundations for self-mentalizing; their actions can appear unpredictable, even to
themselves. When working with these children, the challenge of trying to make sure that
the room is safe for the child and the therapist, and that objects in the room do not get
damaged, can take over. Midgley and his colleagues suggest that in such cases it can be
important for the therapist to express “contingent coordination with the child, drawing
on nonverbal modalities such as making a soothing sound with a soft tone of voice or a
facial expression full of compassion. ...Such interventions can help these children to
attend to and process information and modulate their emotions, before opening the door
to developing other mentalizing abilities ”(Midgley et al. [ 1], pp. 145 –6).322 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
blihd li b C bid  i i 
For such children, creating a sense of joint attention, being together, and predictable
responsiveness may be particularly important. Meanwhile, providing some feedback on
the child ’s physical actions can provide greater awareness of the self and how it is
experienced by others —“That’s a big loud noise, you hit so hard! ”This is a form of
marked mirroring —that is, reflecting back to the child a sense of what they are doing,
but in a regulated way. To return to our developmental theory, it is through the
regulatory marked mirroring of the other that children learn to understand and regulate
their feelings. Children who behave in an out-of-control, unregulated way are often (in,
say, a school environment) met with a rejecting or punitive response that does not allow
them to feel recognized or responded to in a way that helps them make sense of
their experience.
Clarifying and Naming Feelings
Once the MBT-C therapist has established their contingent coordination with the child,
they can start to attempt to make links between behaviors and feelings, elucidating and
labeling feeling states. Feeling states can be named with the assistance of various tools —
for example, picture books or drawings; sometimes it may be useful to ask the child to
make up a little story about what might be going on for a character in the book
or drawing.
Responding to Breakdowns in Mentalizing
MBT-C suggests that the therapist should respond to breakdowns in a child ’s capacity to
mentalize by using techniques described for MBT for adults (see Chapter 4 ), which are
adapted to be appropriate to the age of the child —for example, offering empathy and
support, using “stop and rewind, ”identifying and validating mental states, improving
perspective taking and differentiation between self and other, and creating mentalizing
narratives around difficult experiences or traumatic events (Midgley et al. [ 1], p. 152).
The use of empathy and support is particularly indicated during moments of
heightened affect and dysregulation. The aim here is to help to reduce the child ’s arousal
and distress in a supportive and non-judgmental way.
Stop and rewind may be used after some mentalizing has been restored (through the
use of empathy and support) following a moment of dysregulation. Stop and rewind can
be used to explore and address a collapse in mentalizing of this kind, and to think about
what happened —again, crucially, in a non-judgmental and curious spirit. It may then be
possible to explore other examples of when the child has experienced similar incidents in
different situations.
Mentalizing the relationship is something that can be used in MBT-C to bring the
child ’s attention to the therapist ’s mind, and to use that attention to allow the child to see
other perspectives and to become aware of differences between how the child feels they
are seen by others and how they are thought about. As with MBT in general, mentalizing
the relationship in MBT-C is not about providing transference interpretation, but rather
it is used as a way of bringing in thinking about other minds, and using this to support
the child ’s mentalizing. As with other more demanding mentalizing tasks, mentalizing
the relationship in this way is better introduced when the child ’s affect is reasonably well
regulated. An example might be after a rupture in therapy, in which the child expresses
anger and frustration with the therapist. Only after the moment of rupture has beenWorking with Children 323
blihd li b C bid  i i 
repaired, through the use of empathy and support, and the child is feeling calmer and
more relaxed, might it be appropriate for the therapist to introduce —gently and in a
non-dogmatic way —their own perspective on the incident and how they experienced it.
Such an intervention should be used carefully and with a clear sense that the purpose of it
isnotto provide transference-informed insight into relational patterns. The point of such
an exchange is to help to show the child the value of accessing other minds, and to
generate an experience of the improved interpersonal connection that can arise from
thinking together in this way.
Time and the Use of a Calendar
The time-limited nature of MBT-C is actively addressed throughout the program. It is
also emphasized in MBT-C that the purpose of the work is to support the parents ’and
child ’s mentalizing capacities so that they are more able to respond to challenges and
emotional difficulties in an ongoing way. Being transparent about endings and the finite
nature of the work can be particularly important for children who have been exposed to
multiple separations and who may not have previously felt supported or prepared
for these.
One of the ways in which MBT-C manages the issue of timing is by using a calendar.
The calendar is normally a large piece of paper with the sessions marked on it as circles
or rectangles. The therapist introduces the calendar during the first session, and they
explain that at the end of each session the child will draw something in the shape for that
session, and that by doing this, the child and the therapist can keep track of the sessions
that they have had and look ahead to how many empty shapes remain. The child is also
allowed to decorate and draw on the calendar as they like, to make it feel as if it belongs
to them. When the child is asked to fill in the shape for that day ’s session (normally
about 5 –10 minutes before the end of the session), they are encouraged to draw whatever
they like. The therapist should not try to direct or suggest what goes in the shapes, but
simply let the child do as they wish —although the therapist may need to intervene if the
child seeks to spoil the calendar. The calendar creates a shared narrative of the child ’s
work with the therapist, and allows them both to keep track of how many sessions
are left.
Structure of MBT-C
Assessment Phase (Three or Four Meetings)
The assessment stage of working with children involves gaining some understanding of
the difficulties that the child is presenting with, and developing a formulation. MBT-C
has developed an innovative emphasis on a focus formulation, which is informed by the
ideas of developmentally directed time-limited psychotherapy for children [7, 8]. The
focus formulation can be quite short —for example, a phrase or a story that captures the
child ’s problems in a way that makes sense to them. The important thing is that it is easy
to understand and that the child can see themselves in it.
Midgley and his colleagues give the following example of a focus formulation for a
10-year-boy struggling with behavior at school, attentional difficulties, and bed wetting.
He and his mother were having problems in their relationship following a difficult
period 4 years earlier in which the mother (who was herself struggling with her mental324 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
blihd li b C bid  i i 
health) had hit the boy. The boy wanted to be a soldier when he grew up, so the
formulation was developed in the following way.
His mother had worked really hard on her own problems and could regulate her emotions
much better. The boy, however, kept trying to please his mother, not speaking his mind, and
being tense in the relationship. As the assessment period came to an end, the therapist and
family decided to formulate a focus connected to this relational problem and the boy ’s love for
computer games and soldiers. The therapist asked him what kind of soldier he wanted to be:
A soldier who could not feel what was going on inside himself, who could not sense fear or
anger, and simply tried to obey others? Or a soldier who could be firm and decisive and true to
himself and others, who could feel his emotions and bodily signals to help him to stay safe, even
when the going got tough? The boy loved this focus formulation, and once in therapy he
worked really hard to become more connected with his body and emotions, as well as
understanding himself better. At the end of the 12 sessions, the boy could talk about what had
happened between him and his mother, he hardly wet his bed any more, and he felt better
attuned to peers at his school.
(Midgley et al. [ 6], p. 257)
This is a great example of how a focus formulation speaks to the child ’s view of their
world, and their strengths, hopes, and motivation to develop in an engaged and
positive way.
Sessions 1 –3: Initial Phase
The main objective of the initial sessions of MBT-C is to start to develop a therapeutic
alliance with both the child and the parent(s). The therapist adopts a stance of empathy,
attunement, interest, and engagement with the child and how the child sees the world. Play
is used to introduce the child to being in therapy; a box of play materials is used during the
sessions, and the idea of using the focus formulation as a theme of the play is introduced.
Sessions 4 –8: Middle Phase
The central part of the therapeutic activity, in which there is a focus on supporting the
child ’s mentalizing with regard to the focus formulation, takes place during the middle
phase of MBT-C. It is during this stage, too, that work in relation to the parents and
supporting their reflective parenting takes place. If there are frequent breakdowns in
mentalizing during this stage, resulting from unregulated affect, the approach will
involve considering these situations when they arise and attempting to draw attention
to what had happened to cause the process of escalating mentalizing breakdown. When
the therapeutic process is less punctuated by moments of mentalizing difficulty, the work
with the child and parent(s) involves developing perspective taking and, more explicitly,
mentalizing. Again, this work is undertaken under the umbrella of the mentalizing
stance, in which there is an emphasis on empathic attunement, openness, and curiosity
about mental states, rather than the therapist seeking to laboriously “mentalize at ”the
parent or the child.
Review Meeting
A review meeting is offered around two-thirds of the way through the program. This
meeting is for both the parent(s) and the child, and it provides an opportunity to reviewWorking with Children 325
blihd li b C bid  i i 
the initial focus and treatment goal. It may be agreed that the first eight sessions have
been enough and that it is now possible to think about drawing the therapy to an end, or
a decision may be made to continue with the sessions. In cases where it is felt that more
ongoing treatment would be useful, another program of 12 sessions can be offered, up to
a maximum of 36 sessions in total. This may be indicated in cases where the child ’s needs
are more complex —for example, if the child has experienced trauma. The focus formu-
lation will be reconsidered during the review meeting, in order to assess whether it still
feels relevant and accurate, whether it has changed, or whether it appears to have a
different significance or meaning.
Sessions 9 –12: Ending Phase
During the last few sessions, when the end of the therapeutic process is in sight, there
needs to be an additional focus on getting the child ready for the ending. As part of this
focus, thought needs to be given to how the gains made in therapy can be supported in
the longer term. As MBT-C is a time-limited treatment, keeping the ending in mind is
important; as part of this, the calendar is actively used throughout the process to allow
the child to have a sense of how many sessions they have completed, and how many are
still left.
Concluding Remarks
When working with children, it is important to bear in mind that learning to mentalize is
something that gradually develops throughout childhood and adolescence, and the
emerging capacity to mentalize is scaffolded by the social environment around the child.
Although mentalizing is an evolutionarily prewired capacity, in that normatively
developing children typically show joint attention and shared intentionality —capacities
that reflect mentalizing —from early infancy [ 9,10], considerable environmental input is
needed for the child to develop a fully balanced capacity for mentalizing. Beginning in
infancy, when mentalizing is very basic, the job of the parent is to make sense of the
infant ’s mental state and reflect it back to the infant in a regulated way, through the
process of marked mirroring [11]. This reading of the baby ’s state and modeling of it for
them, while also making it clear that the parent is not overwhelmed by whatever feeling
the baby is experiencing, is quite demanding for a parent ’s mentalizing. This is not
helped by the fact that the experience of caring for children —especially young children,
or older children whose mentalizing capacities are less well developed for whatever
reason —might require the parent to operate in an intensely non-mentalizing social
system. In this situation the parent cannot draw on the child ’s mentalizing to recalibrate
their own mentalizing, while the intensity of the child ’s needs can put a lot of pressure on
the parent ’s ability to maintain balanced mentalizing. This is one of the reasons why a
network of support around children and parents is so essential. Although children ’s
undeveloped capacity for understanding mental states is understood and expected by
most parents, this understanding can be hard to hold on to under the pressure of
heightened distress, exhaustion, and so on. For some parents with more vulnerable
pre-existing mentalizing capacities, holding on to the ability to think about mental states
in a regulated way while looking after a child can be a real challenge. The purpose of
MBT-C is to provide an additional space in which the mentalizing of children and their
families can be supported and encouraged to grow.326 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
blihd li b C bid  i i 
References
1. Midgley N, Ensink K, Lindqvist K et al.
Mentalization-Based Treatment for
Children: A Time-Limited Approach .
Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association, 2017.
2. Fonagy P, Target M. Playing with reality:
I. Theory of mind and the normal
development of psychic reality. Int
J Psychoanal 1996; 77: 217 –33.
3. Target M, Fonagy P. Playing with reality:
II. The development of psychic reality
from a theoretical perspective. Int
J Psychoanal 1996; 77: 459 –79.
4. Fonagy P, Target M. Playing with reality:
III. The persistence of dual psychic reality
in borderline patients. Int J Psychoanal
2000; 81: 853 –74.
5. Tessier VP, Normandin L, Ensink K,
Fonagy P. Fact or fiction? A longitudinal
study of play and the development of
reflective functioning. Bull Menninger
Clin 2016; 80:6 0–79.
6. Midgley N, Muller N, Malberg N et al.
Children. In: Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds.Handbook of Mentalizing in Mental
Health Practice , 2nd ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association
Publishing, 2019; 247 –63.
7. Hansen BR. I Dialog med Barnet:
Intersubjektivitet i Utvikling og i
Psykoterapi [In Dialogue with the Child:
Intersubjectivity in Development and in
Psychotherapy ]. Oslo: Gyldendal, 2012.
8. Haugvik M, Johns U. Facets of structure
and adaptation: a qualitative study of
time-limited psychotherapy with children
experiencing difficult family situations.
Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 2008; 13:
235–52.
9. Csibra G, Gergely G. Natural pedagogy.
Trends Cogn Sci 2009; 13: 148 –53.
10. Tomasello M, Vaish A. Origins of human
cooperation and morality. Annu Rev
Psychol 2013; 64: 231 –55.
11. Gergely G, Watson JS. The social
biofeedback theory of parental affect-
mirroring: the development of emotional
self-awareness and self-control in infancy.
Int J Psychoanal 1996; 77: 1181 –212.Working with Children 327
blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part IV
Chapter
13Application of Mentalization-Based Treatment in
Different Populations and in Different Settings
Working with Children
Introduction
An important way in which mentalization-based treatment (MBT) has been adapted for
children has been in the development of MBT-C by Nick Midgley and his colleagues [ 1].
Although there is good evidence for cognitive –behavioral interventions for children,
many children may not be able to make full use of cognitive –behavioral strategies if they
do not have the necessary self-regulatory or cognitive strengths. Midgley and his
colleagues realized that a model that integrated mentalizing, attachment, and a psycho-
dynamic approach might provide a valuable additional treatment option for children and
families. MBT-C is a time-limited program (usually 12 weeks) for children between the
ages of about 5 and 10 years, which has an emphasis on supporting the development of
mentalizing. It is considered an appropriate approach for many mental health difficul-
ties, including conduct and behavioral problems and low mood and anxiety.
MBT-C does not seek to resolve all of the difficulties that a child might be experi-
encing, but aims to strengthen the child ’s emerging mentalizing —and the parents ’
capacity to scaffold their child ’s mentalizing —so that a process of change is initiated.
In doing this, MBT-C aims to increase the child ’s capacity for emotional regulation and
to support their parents to best meet the emotional needs of their children. This means
providing opportunities for parents and children to practice good mentalizing, and it
also involves paying attention to the situations in which mentalizing breaks down, and
working on areas where there are deficits in the capacity to mentalize. Midgley and his
colleagues suggest that this emphasis on mentalizing is supported by research which
shows that mentalizing abilities are associated with a “positive sense of self, healthy
relationships, and better emotional regulation ”(Midgley et al. [ 1], p. 6).
MBT-C involves working with parents to support their capacity to take a mentalizing
stance toward their children. The approach seeks to help parents to view their child as a
separate person with their own mind and experiences, and to enable the parents to
become more open to thinking about the mental states that might drive their child ’s
behavior. The parents are also encouraged to think about their own mental states and,
crucially, to think about how their own mental states and behaviors are seen by, and
affect, their child.
The standard format for MBT-C is 12 individual sessions that take place weekly with the
child, with separate sessions held with the parent(s). However, this format is flexible, as it may
need to be adjusted according to the setting or the needs of the children and parents: “What is
important is that the therapeutic contract is clear and coherent from the beginning —for the
parents, as well as for the child. This is a way of creating a sense of safety and collaboration,
and avoiding a scenario in which the therapist makes decisions that the family is unaware of.
319
h di 00 98088960 404 blihd li b C bid  i i 
This transparency is part of the mentalizing stance, and contributes to a sense of shared
ownership of the therapeutic process ”(Midgley et al. [ 1], p. 252).
The Mentalizing Stance in MBT-C
In terms of technique, MBT-C is fundamentally informed by the mentalizing stance,
which is viewed throughout this book as core to all mentalizing-informed work. As with
any MBT approach, the experience of the richly mentalizing relationship, characterized
by empathic attunement, openness, and curiosity about mental states, is at the heart
of the intervention, rather than any specific techniques. The following extract is from a
clinical vignette described by Midgley and his colleagues in their book on MBT-C [ 1].
It is an account of a therapist ’s first meeting with Belinda, a 7-year-old girl who is
withdrawn, anxious, and struggling to make friends.
When the therapist first meets Belinda, he is struck by how little eye contact she makes. At their
first individual meeting, Belinda follows the therapist to the playroom but sits rather listlessly,
drawing circles on a piece of paper. When the therapist invites her to play a game of catch,
Belinda looks surprised, but accepts. She throws the ball a few times, but her coordination is poor,
and one of her throws knocks a plastic cup off the table on to the floor. Belinda glances quickly at
the therapist and appears scared. The therapist smiles at Belinda and gets down to floor level,
picking up the cup. “Don’tw o r r y —not broken ,”he says, and shows Belinda the cup. Then he goes
on:“Id o n’tk n o ww h a ty o u ’re like, but when I go somewhere new, I ’m always a bit nervous about
what people are going to think of me. I don ’tk n o wi ft h e y ’re going to like me or not .”
Belinda looks at the therapist with a bit of curiosity. “Know the feeling ?”he asks, but Belinda
doesn ’t reply. Instead, she picks up the ball, and they carry on playing catch. The therapist starts
adding in different tricks, and soon they are laughing. “Good catch! ”he says, when Belinda
reaches a ball that is quite high. And when he misses one and the soft ball bounces off Belinda ’s
nose, the therapist says, “Ouch! ”in a playful, somewhat exaggerated manner. “Did that hurt? ”
he asks, but Belinda shakes her head no.
(Midgley et al. [ 1], p. 85)
What is so well conveyed in this vignette is how lightly the therapist ’s stance is held, yet
it consistently involves empathy, authenticity, interest, positivity, and a non-judgmental
openness: “Belinda ’s therapist presents himself as an interested, well-disposed adult, who
engages with Belinda in a reciprocal way and shows interest in understanding how Belinda
is feeling. He is not a ‘blank screen ’but speaks about feelings and discloses a little of his
own personal experience and what goes on in his own mind ”(Midgley et al. [ 1], p. 86).
The therapist is warm and supportive rather than inscrutable or detached, but at the
same time he is not overly emotional or elaborate in his attempts at mentalizing, which
could be over-arousing for Belinda. Rather, the approach that the therapist uses is to
create a safe environment in which two minds can meet together in the room in a
regulated way, and can begin to think together about what is in those minds and how
they respond to each other.
Another clinical example captures how heightened affect and misunderstandings are
managed. This case involves Mohammed, a 7-year-old boy who is attending a session
after he got into trouble at school for physically attacking a classmate.
The therapist begins the session with Mohammed, who at first makes no reference to what had
happened that day but begins a game in which a doll is being picked on by all the other dolls. At
one point the doll kicks back and tells the others to go away. The therapist says, with some320 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 404 blihd li b C bid  i i 
feeling: “It seems like she wants them all to get out of her face! ”Mohammed turns round,
abruptly, and throws the doll toward the therapist ’s face, at the same time screaming at her,
“I hate you! I hate you! ”The therapist has not expected this and immediately moves backward,
away from Mohammed, breaking eye contact. As she does so, she says, “Mohammed, I ’m really
sorry. I ’m not quite sure what I ’ve done, but I can see that I ’ve really upset you. I ’m so sorry. ”At
that point, Mohammed bursts into tears.
(Midgley et al. [ 1], pp. 98 –9)
The therapist was genuinely surprised by Mohammed ’s reaction, but her first
response was to apologize for having behaved in a way that was so upsetting to him.
This response was to help to regulate Mohammed and acknowledge that something had
gone wrong between them. The therapist did not try to come up with a theory about
Mohammed ’s mental state at the time, but simply modeled a stance in which the
difficulty of understanding mental states (in this case the therapist ’s difficulty in relation
to Mohammed) was acknowledged, but not catastrophized.
MBT as a Play-Centered Approach
Play is at the heart of the MBT-C model. Fonagy and Target have suggested that play is
an antecedent of mentalizing [ 2–4]. There is evidence from research which indicates that
the capacity for pretend play is associated with improved reflective functioning (i.e.,
mentalizing); a study of children with a history of being sexually abused found that play
mediates the relationship between having experienced abuse and children ’s later mental-
izing capacity [ 5]. While a child is playing, the therapist can use various approaches to
improve the child ’s awareness of mental states. At its simplest, this can take the form of
describing the play process [ 6]. This is a process in which the therapist describes,
summarizes, and integrates the child ’s feelings, behaviors, and thoughts during their
play. A further step is for the therapist to then describe the child ’s behavior in terms of
their mental states, allowing them to touch on difficult thoughts or aspects of the child ’s
play that might feel too overwhelming to talk about. Midgley and his colleagues describe
various ways in which mentalizing and play can come together, and we shall summarize
these approaches in this section.
Stimulating the Play Narrative
For a child who is anxious, inhibited, or withdrawn in relation to their play, it may be
helpful for the therapist to ask questions, to help them to understand the story of the
play. “This technique is the first step to understanding the play context that the child is
presenting during the session and helps the therapist make sense of what is going on.
Additionally, this technique encourages the child to elaborate the stories presented
during the play through gentle inquiry about the material presented and by asking for
more details and descriptions ”(Midgley et al. [ 1], p. 136).
Midgley and his colleagues draw a parallel between this technique and the clarifica-
tion and exploration that are used in MBT for adults (described in Chapter 4 ).
Mentalizing the Play
With a child who is able to engage in symbolic play, the therapist can take the step of
mentalizing the narrative of the play . This means verbalizing the story of the play, andWorking with Children 321
h di 00 98088960 404 blihd li b C bid  i i 
supporting greater exploration of the thoughts and ideas behind it. The therapist remains
cautious and wondering (not-knowing) about their description of the narrative, and
allows the child to elaborate or correct the therapist ’s account. The aim of this approach
is to stimulate mentalizing in a playful and undogmatic manner, allowing the introduc-
tion of different perspectives in a way that is respectful of both the play itself and the
child ’s own possible thoughts and feelings about it. A keen message that is conveyed in
this process is that the child ’s play is valued; their sense of agency and what they are
doing are treated as interesting, and the therapist engages with the play in a playful
way themselves.
Problems with Symbolic Play
Some children may not engage in symbolic play. Older children might feel that they have
grown out of pretend play and will be more interested in using drawing, painting, or clay
than engaging in symbolic play; board games can be another option for some children.
Younger children who cannot or will not engage in pretend play can be asked to join in
activities that are more body based —for example, throwing and catching a ball, sword
fighting, or playing music. Using clay or a sand box can be a valuable way into being
playful for children who are inhibited or unwilling to engage in symbolic play. All of
these games involve interaction, rhythm, and ritual, and allow experimentation with
different sensations and activities.
Pitching the Right Intervention for the Child, at the
Right Moment
An often repeated idea in this book is that when someone ’s mentalizing has gone
“offline, ”it is not helpful to seek to use an explicitly mentalizing response at that
moment. Instead, it is more helpful to reduce the patient ’s arousal, to show empathy,
and to validate the patient ’s experience. This applies in just the same way when working
with children. Almost inevitably there will be times when the therapist gets this wrong —
for example, they might introduce an intervention that is too demanding or explicitly
mentalizing at a moment that feels overwhelming or makes the child feel misunderstood.
The task of the therapist at such moments is to be honest and apologetic about their
misattunement, as we saw in the clinical example of Mohammed earlier in this chapter.
Mirroring and Contingent Responding
Children who are chaotic and who seem disorganized in their responses and unregulated
in their actions are often referred for behavioral difficulties. These children seem to lack
the foundations for self-mentalizing; their actions can appear unpredictable, even to
themselves. When working with these children, the challenge of trying to make sure that
the room is safe for the child and the therapist, and that objects in the room do not get
damaged, can take over. Midgley and his colleagues suggest that in such cases it can be
important for the therapist to express “contingent coordination with the child, drawing
on nonverbal modalities such as making a soothing sound with a soft tone of voice or a
facial expression full of compassion. ...Such interventions can help these children to
attend to and process information and modulate their emotions, before opening the door
to developing other mentalizing abilities ”(Midgley et al. [ 1], pp. 145 –6).322 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 404 blihd li b C bid  i i 
For such children, creating a sense of joint attention, being together, and predictable
responsiveness may be particularly important. Meanwhile, providing some feedback on
the child ’s physical actions can provide greater awareness of the self and how it is
experienced by others —“That’s a big loud noise, you hit so hard! ”This is a form of
marked mirroring —that is, reflecting back to the child a sense of what they are doing,
but in a regulated way. To return to our developmental theory, it is through the
regulatory marked mirroring of the other that children learn to understand and regulate
their feelings. Children who behave in an out-of-control, unregulated way are often (in,
say, a school environment) met with a rejecting or punitive response that does not allow
them to feel recognized or responded to in a way that helps them make sense of
their experience.
Clarifying and Naming Feelings
Once the MBT-C therapist has established their contingent coordination with the child,
they can start to attempt to make links between behaviors and feelings, elucidating and
labeling feeling states. Feeling states can be named with the assistance of various tools —
for example, picture books or drawings; sometimes it may be useful to ask the child to
make up a little story about what might be going on for a character in the book
or drawing.
Responding to Breakdowns in Mentalizing
MBT-C suggests that the therapist should respond to breakdowns in a child ’s capacity to
mentalize by using techniques described for MBT for adults (see Chapter 4 ), which are
adapted to be appropriate to the age of the child —for example, offering empathy and
support, using “stop and rewind, ”identifying and validating mental states, improving
perspective taking and differentiation between self and other, and creating mentalizing
narratives around difficult experiences or traumatic events (Midgley et al. [ 1], p. 152).
The use of empathy and support is particularly indicated during moments of
heightened affect and dysregulation. The aim here is to help to reduce the child ’s arousal
and distress in a supportive and non-judgmental way.
Stop and rewind may be used after some mentalizing has been restored (through the
use of empathy and support) following a moment of dysregulation. Stop and rewind can
be used to explore and address a collapse in mentalizing of this kind, and to think about
what happened —again, crucially, in a non-judgmental and curious spirit. It may then be
possible to explore other examples of when the child has experienced similar incidents in
different situations.
Mentalizing the relationship is something that can be used in MBT-C to bring the
child ’s attention to the therapist ’s mind, and to use that attention to allow the child to see
other perspectives and to become aware of differences between how the child feels they
are seen by others and how they are thought about. As with MBT in general, mentalizing
the relationship in MBT-C is not about providing transference interpretation, but rather
it is used as a way of bringing in thinking about other minds, and using this to support
the child ’s mentalizing. As with other more demanding mentalizing tasks, mentalizing
the relationship in this way is better introduced when the child ’s affect is reasonably well
regulated. An example might be after a rupture in therapy, in which the child expresses
anger and frustration with the therapist. Only after the moment of rupture has beenWorking with Children 323
h di 00 98088960 404 blihd li b C bid  i i 
repaired, through the use of empathy and support, and the child is feeling calmer and
more relaxed, might it be appropriate for the therapist to introduce —gently and in a
non-dogmatic way —their own perspective on the incident and how they experienced it.
Such an intervention should be used carefully and with a clear sense that the purpose of it
isnotto provide transference-informed insight into relational patterns. The point of such
an exchange is to help to show the child the value of accessing other minds, and to
generate an experience of the improved interpersonal connection that can arise from
thinking together in this way.
Time and the Use of a Calendar
The time-limited nature of MBT-C is actively addressed throughout the program. It is
also emphasized in MBT-C that the purpose of the work is to support the parents ’and
child ’s mentalizing capacities so that they are more able to respond to challenges and
emotional difficulties in an ongoing way. Being transparent about endings and the finite
nature of the work can be particularly important for children who have been exposed to
multiple separations and who may not have previously felt supported or prepared
for these.
One of the ways in which MBT-C manages the issue of timing is by using a calendar.
The calendar is normally a large piece of paper with the sessions marked on it as circles
or rectangles. The therapist introduces the calendar during the first session, and they
explain that at the end of each session the child will draw something in the shape for that
session, and that by doing this, the child and the therapist can keep track of the sessions
that they have had and look ahead to how many empty shapes remain. The child is also
allowed to decorate and draw on the calendar as they like, to make it feel as if it belongs
to them. When the child is asked to fill in the shape for that day ’s session (normally
about 5 –10 minutes before the end of the session), they are encouraged to draw whatever
they like. The therapist should not try to direct or suggest what goes in the shapes, but
simply let the child do as they wish —although the therapist may need to intervene if the
child seeks to spoil the calendar. The calendar creates a shared narrative of the child ’s
work with the therapist, and allows them both to keep track of how many sessions
are left.
Structure of MBT-C
Assessment Phase (Three or Four Meetings)
The assessment stage of working with children involves gaining some understanding of
the difficulties that the child is presenting with, and developing a formulation. MBT-C
has developed an innovative emphasis on a focus formulation, which is informed by the
ideas of developmentally directed time-limited psychotherapy for children [7, 8]. The
focus formulation can be quite short —for example, a phrase or a story that captures the
child ’s problems in a way that makes sense to them. The important thing is that it is easy
to understand and that the child can see themselves in it.
Midgley and his colleagues give the following example of a focus formulation for a
10-year-boy struggling with behavior at school, attentional difficulties, and bed wetting.
He and his mother were having problems in their relationship following a difficult
period 4 years earlier in which the mother (who was herself struggling with her mental324 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 404 blihd li b C bid  i i 
health) had hit the boy. The boy wanted to be a soldier when he grew up, so the
formulation was developed in the following way.
His mother had worked really hard on her own problems and could regulate her emotions
much better. The boy, however, kept trying to please his mother, not speaking his mind, and
being tense in the relationship. As the assessment period came to an end, the therapist and
family decided to formulate a focus connected to this relational problem and the boy ’s love for
computer games and soldiers. The therapist asked him what kind of soldier he wanted to be:
A soldier who could not feel what was going on inside himself, who could not sense fear or
anger, and simply tried to obey others? Or a soldier who could be firm and decisive and true to
himself and others, who could feel his emotions and bodily signals to help him to stay safe, even
when the going got tough? The boy loved this focus formulation, and once in therapy he
worked really hard to become more connected with his body and emotions, as well as
understanding himself better. At the end of the 12 sessions, the boy could talk about what had
happened between him and his mother, he hardly wet his bed any more, and he felt better
attuned to peers at his school.
(Midgley et al. [ 6], p. 257)
This is a great example of how a focus formulation speaks to the child ’s view of their
world, and their strengths, hopes, and motivation to develop in an engaged and
positive way.
Sessions 1 –3: Initial Phase
The main objective of the initial sessions of MBT-C is to start to develop a therapeutic
alliance with both the child and the parent(s). The therapist adopts a stance of empathy,
attunement, interest, and engagement with the child and how the child sees the world. Play
is used to introduce the child to being in therapy; a box of play materials is used during the
sessions, and the idea of using the focus formulation as a theme of the play is introduced.
Sessions 4 –8: Middle Phase
The central part of the therapeutic activity, in which there is a focus on supporting the
child ’s mentalizing with regard to the focus formulation, takes place during the middle
phase of MBT-C. It is during this stage, too, that work in relation to the parents and
supporting their reflective parenting takes place. If there are frequent breakdowns in
mentalizing during this stage, resulting from unregulated affect, the approach will
involve considering these situations when they arise and attempting to draw attention
to what had happened to cause the process of escalating mentalizing breakdown. When
the therapeutic process is less punctuated by moments of mentalizing difficulty, the work
with the child and parent(s) involves developing perspective taking and, more explicitly,
mentalizing. Again, this work is undertaken under the umbrella of the mentalizing
stance, in which there is an emphasis on empathic attunement, openness, and curiosity
about mental states, rather than the therapist seeking to laboriously “mentalize at ”the
parent or the child.
Review Meeting
A review meeting is offered around two-thirds of the way through the program. This
meeting is for both the parent(s) and the child, and it provides an opportunity to reviewWorking with Children 325
h di 00 98088960 404 blihd li b C bid  i i 
the initial focus and treatment goal. It may be agreed that the first eight sessions have
been enough and that it is now possible to think about drawing the therapy to an end, or
a decision may be made to continue with the sessions. In cases where it is felt that more
ongoing treatment would be useful, another program of 12 sessions can be offered, up to
a maximum of 36 sessions in total. This may be indicated in cases where the child ’s needs
are more complex —for example, if the child has experienced trauma. The focus formu-
lation will be reconsidered during the review meeting, in order to assess whether it still
feels relevant and accurate, whether it has changed, or whether it appears to have a
different significance or meaning.
Sessions 9 –12: Ending Phase
During the last few sessions, when the end of the therapeutic process is in sight, there
needs to be an additional focus on getting the child ready for the ending. As part of this
focus, thought needs to be given to how the gains made in therapy can be supported in
the longer term. As MBT-C is a time-limited treatment, keeping the ending in mind is
important; as part of this, the calendar is actively used throughout the process to allow
the child to have a sense of how many sessions they have completed, and how many are
still left.
Concluding Remarks
When working with children, it is important to bear in mind that learning to mentalize is
something that gradually develops throughout childhood and adolescence, and the
emerging capacity to mentalize is scaffolded by the social environment around the child.
Although mentalizing is an evolutionarily prewired capacity, in that normatively
developing children typically show joint attention and shared intentionality —capacities
that reflect mentalizing —from early infancy [ 9,10], considerable environmental input is
needed for the child to develop a fully balanced capacity for mentalizing. Beginning in
infancy, when mentalizing is very basic, the job of the parent is to make sense of the
infant ’s mental state and reflect it back to the infant in a regulated way, through the
process of marked mirroring [11]. This reading of the baby ’s state and modeling of it for
them, while also making it clear that the parent is not overwhelmed by whatever feeling
the baby is experiencing, is quite demanding for a parent ’s mentalizing. This is not
helped by the fact that the experience of caring for children —especially young children,
or older children whose mentalizing capacities are less well developed for whatever
reason —might require the parent to operate in an intensely non-mentalizing social
system. In this situation the parent cannot draw on the child ’s mentalizing to recalibrate
their own mentalizing, while the intensity of the child ’s needs can put a lot of pressure on
the parent ’s ability to maintain balanced mentalizing. This is one of the reasons why a
network of support around children and parents is so essential. Although children ’s
undeveloped capacity for understanding mental states is understood and expected by
most parents, this understanding can be hard to hold on to under the pressure of
heightened distress, exhaustion, and so on. For some parents with more vulnerable
pre-existing mentalizing capacities, holding on to the ability to think about mental states
in a regulated way while looking after a child can be a real challenge. The purpose of
MBT-C is to provide an additional space in which the mentalizing of children and their
families can be supported and encouraged to grow.326 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 404 blihd li b C bid  i i 
References
1. Midgley N, Ensink K, Lindqvist K et al.
Mentalization-Based Treatment for
Children: A Time-Limited Approach .
Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association, 2017.
2. Fonagy P, Target M. Playing with reality:
I. Theory of mind and the normal
development of psychic reality. Int
J Psychoanal 1996; 77: 217 –33.
3. Target M, Fonagy P. Playing with reality:
II. The development of psychic reality
from a theoretical perspective. Int
J Psychoanal 1996; 77: 459 –79.
4. Fonagy P, Target M. Playing with reality:
III. The persistence of dual psychic reality
in borderline patients. Int J Psychoanal
2000; 81: 853 –74.
5. Tessier VP, Normandin L, Ensink K,
Fonagy P. Fact or fiction? A longitudinal
study of play and the development of
reflective functioning. Bull Menninger
Clin 2016; 80:6 0–79.
6. Midgley N, Muller N, Malberg N et al.
Children. In: Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds.Handbook of Mentalizing in Mental
Health Practice , 2nd ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association
Publishing, 2019; 247 –63.
7. Hansen BR. I Dialog med Barnet:
Intersubjektivitet i Utvikling og i
Psykoterapi [In Dialogue with the Child:
Intersubjectivity in Development and in
Psychotherapy ]. Oslo: Gyldendal, 2012.
8. Haugvik M, Johns U. Facets of structure
and adaptation: a qualitative study of
time-limited psychotherapy with children
experiencing difficult family situations.
Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 2008; 13:
235–52.
9. Csibra G, Gergely G. Natural pedagogy.
Trends Cogn Sci 2009; 13: 148 –53.
10. Tomasello M, Vaish A. Origins of human
cooperation and morality. Annu Rev
Psychol 2013; 64: 231 –55.
11. Gergely G, Watson JS. The social
biofeedback theory of parental affect-
mirroring: the development of emotional
self-awareness and self-control in infancy.
Int J Psychoanal 1996; 77: 1181 –212.Working with Children 327
h di 00 98088960 404 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part IV
Chapter
14Application of Mentalization-Based Treatment in
Different Populations and in Different Settings
Working with Adolescents
Introduction
Mentalization-based treatment for adolescents (MBT-A) was originally developed to
treat adolescents who self-harm. MBT-A has subsequently been developed more broadly
into an approach to help young people to improve their capacity to represent their own
and others ’feelings more accurately, particularly in the context of emotional challenges
and interpersonal stressors; it has a strong focus on impulsivity and affect regulation.
The rationale behind MBT-A is that mentalizing problems underlie most of the difficul-
ties that adolescents experience in the arena of impulsivity and self-regulation, and often
drive relationship challenges and conflicts. The MBT approach as a whole is primarily
concerned with mental states in the here and now rather than with the unconscious
processes that drive these states, or with cognitive –behavioral management strategies for
behavioral symptoms; this emphasis can be particularly salient when working with
adolescents who find moments of their day-to-day experiences overwhelming. As with
MBT-C (outlined in Chapter 13 ), MBT-A seeks to help young people to regain a more
helpful place on the developmental trajectory, which has the specific task of achieving
self-identity and agency.
Adolescence brings with it particular challenges to the young person ’s capacity to
maintain balanced mentalizing. Research i ndicates that the pre viously accepted idea
that social-cognitive develo pment is largely achieved by the beginning of adolescence
is inaccurate, and that the brain is still und ergoing significant neurobiological change
during adolescence, particularly in relation to social cognition [ 1–3]. For example,
Mills et al. [ 2] have found that the gray matter volume in regions of the brain that are
associated with mentalizing —the temporoparietal junction, posterior superior tem-
poral sulcus, and medial prefrontal cortex —decreases from childhood into the early
twenties. Meanwhile, the gray matter volume of the anterior temporal cortex, another
part of the “social brain ”network, increases until early adolescence, and cortical
thickness increases into early adulthood. More research into the developmental neuro-
biology of mentalizing is needed , but there are suggestions that “while brain regions
involved in social perception develop early in life, the fine-tuning or functional
specialization of other regions of the social brain network may continue during
adolescence ”(Moor et al. [ 4], p. 50). This is reflected in findings of a slight decline
in performance on the Reading the Mind in the Eyes task in 14- to 16-year-olds
compared with adults [ 4].
The clinical implication of such research is that individuals who enter adolescence
with a predisposition to weakness in their capacity for mentalizing (which may arise for
328
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
many different reasons, such as genetic or environmental factors, or an interaction of the
two) may be particularly vulnerable when faced with the considerable developmental
demands of this life stage. Given the challenges that adolescents experience in relation to
maintaining the capacity for mentalizing, wider systems around them that support the
social-cognitive processes that underpin affect regulation in the face of challenges and
stresses have an important role to play. For example, an experimental study indicated
that a brief intervention to encourage empathic discipline reduced school suspension
rates by 50% among adolescents [ 5] (for a discussion of mentalization-based interven-
tions in schools and other settings, see also Chapter 17 ). When working with children,
adolescents, and families, the interactive and mutually reinforcing nature of mentalizing
is particularly evident, as is the value of supporting a mentalizing environment around
adolescents across different settings and forms of working (e.g., pastoral care in school,
youth work, psychotherapy). Regardless of the cause of an adolescent ’s difficulties,
supporting their capacity to mentalize can be helpful because mentalizing supports affect
regulation. Moreover, being able to recognize mental states and think about them can
help a young person to identify that, for example, they might need help. Being able to
think in a more complex way about other people may enable a young person who tends
to be aggressively reactive to pause when they feel provoked by someone else, rather than
immediately retaliating.
A clear sense of the mentalizing profile of the young person (and, where relevant, the
mentalizing profiles of their parents or carers) will provide the clinician with valuable
insights. Just as all interventions need to be age appropriate, it is also essential that they
are appropriate to the adolescent ’s mentalizing capacity. Understanding an adolescent ’s
mentalizing profile requires knowledge of what might be approximately normative for
an adolescent at that age, and how the individual ’s profile differs from what might be
typically expected. Examples of this may be seen in the kinds of problems that a school
counselor or mental health worker might encounter in the course of their work at a
secondary school. Here we provide two clinical examples of adolescents with different
presenting problems and different underlying mentalizing profiles.
Clinical Example: Eddie
Eddie, who was 15 years of age, was referred for panic attacks and high levels of social
anxiety, which were causing low mood, school refusal, and considerable distress. Eddie
was an intelligent and thoughtful adolescent who was interested in other people ’s minds
and attempting to make sense of his own mental states. In fact, this may have been part of
the problem for Eddie —when he was bullied both in person and on social media (the
seriousness of the bullying was not initially adequately addressed by his school) he
became highly preoccupied and distressed by what he experienced as coming from the
minds of his peers. At times, Eddie would feel so overwhelmed by his thoughts and fears
about his peers and their behavior that he would become angry and aggressive, and on
occasion the alien self (see Chapter 2 ) would become active. In a non-mentalizing state of
mind, Eddie would become hostile and even threatening to his peers, which created a
vicious cycle of difficult and problematic social relations. From a mentalizing perspective,
Eddie ’s situation could be understood in terms of his naturally high capacity for mentaliz-
ing becoming overactivated and unbalanced in response to the quite considerable social
stressors he was facing. As a result, therapeutic work with Eddie could be approached in
terms of thinking about overthinking and the sudden emergence of underthinking whenWorking with Adolescents 329
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
he was feeling stressed. Eddie found it useful and interesting to be introduced to thinking
reflectively about mental states, his process of hypermentalizing other people, and under-
standing his non-mentalizing in moments of stress and distress. An additional factor that
was essential in helping Eddie was initiating discussions with some of his schoolteachers
about the level of hostility from his peers to which he had been exposed, which led to
certain teachers (his form teacher and some significant subject teachers) acknowledging
what he was experiencing and expressing their support. This caused a major shift in how
frightening and non-mentalizing he found the social climate at school, leading him to be
able to access help and reduce his sense of panic and the escalating presence of the alien
self when he was exposed to difficult interactions.Clinical Example: Maya
Maya, who was 15 years old, was experiencing depression, anxiety, and chaotic eating
patterns. She found it quite difficult to think about her state of mind in any way at all. In
discussions about how she was feeling and her thoughts about her difficulties, she was
only able to describe a very general sense of stress and physical symptoms, such as having
a headache or feeling sick. Although Maya was the same age and at the same level of
academic competence as Eddie, she really struggled to think in mental-state terms about
her experiences and about other people ’s motivations —her teachers were seen as simply
wanting to stress her out, and a friend with whom she had fallen out was described as just
wanting to annoy her. As we mentioned in Chapters 3 and 4,it is not helpful to respond to
someone ’s non-mentalizing with mentalizing. Rather, in Maya ’s case, it was more helpful
for the clinician to begin by validating Maya ’s experiences and for the two of them to talk
together about these, even as Maya discussed them in quite concrete terms, in order to
begin the process of showing an interest in Maya ’s experience and reflecting back to her
something of her experience and its reception by someone else ’s mind. Only after
generating this initial experience with her was it appropriate to start to explore her mental
states a little more, in the first instance via the clinician ’s expressions of curiosity and
interest and simply raising the possibility of there being more complex thoughts behind
Maya ’s responses, which could then be explored by Maya as well. In Maya ’s case, a warm
but rather light-hearted and tentative, even self-deprecating approach by the clinician
seemed to help to introduce this way of thinking. For example, the clinician made
comments such as “You know I ’m always very interested in what things are like for you,
Maya, and I ’d be so keen to understand more about how you are feeling —but I know
I probably get things wrong most of the time (the clinician rolls her eyes at herself) so tell
me if I ’m being totally clueless here, but I wonder if ...”
Key Concepts Involved in Working with Adolescents
Many of the major ideas that inform MBT theory and practice and which were covered
inPart II of this book are relevant to working with adolescents —for example, the role of
the non-mentalizing modes and careful consideration of the interpersonal situations that
are likely to stimulate the emergence of these modes. When working with adolescents,
this will usually involve careful additional consideration of the young person ’s family and
educational environment. Often non-mentalizing behavior by parents or caregivers can
be a part of established spirals of reactive non-mentalizing. Understanding the perceived330 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
hostile, rejecting, or punitive stance that can trigger these cycles is frequently an
important aspect of making sense of non-mentalizing behavior, and it is for this reason
that family MBT is normally recommended alongside individual MBT-A.
Similarly, the mentalizing stance is core to MBT-A. The therapist ’s open curiosity,
compassion, and warmth are at the heart of MBT-A. Trudie Rossouw has beautifully
captured the significance of the mentalizing stance in relation to working with adoles-
cents: “So often young people are caught in a frightening inner world of self-hatred
which renders them vulnerable to expect similar feelings of disdain from the world
around them ...these youngsters often relate to themselves in a dehumanising way. We
need to embody humanity in our interactions with young people in therapy. We show
authentic interest and curiosity about the young person ’s life and mind, and we explore
the richness of all possibilities in a non-judgmental way ”(Rossouw [ 6], p. 45).
As Rossouw and her colleagues have described, within the framework of the menta-
lizing stance there are four key forms of therapeutic technique in MBT-A practice [ 7]:
1. support and empathy
2. clarification and elaboration
3. challenge
4. mentalizing the patient –therapist relationship.
This group of techniques forms the basis o f the original MBT approach developed
for the treatment of adults with personality disorders [ 8]. Rossouw and her colleagues
have applied and developed these techniques in relation to working with young
people, and readers who are interested in learning more about MBT-A are encouraged
to read their indispensable practical guide to this approach [ 7]. For the purpose of
providing an introduction to how MBT-A has been developed, we shall offer a brief
overview here.
Support and Empathy
The provision of support and empathy by the therapist is the most continuously applied
technique in MBT-A; it is particularly important at the start of treatment and whenever
patients are overwhelmed and dysregulated. As we mentioned in Chapter 4 , when a
patient is distressed and their mentalizing abilities are under siege by overwhelming
emotions, the therapist makes no immediate attempt to introduce a mentalizing inter-
vention designed to re-stimulate the patient ’s mentalizing. Instead it is recommended
that they provide some support, empathy, and validation and recognition of the patient ’s
experience —a form of emotional marked mirroring. This may involve statements such
as“Wow, hearing you describe that, I can really see how difficult it must have felt. ”
Clarification, Elaboration, and Challenge
The techniques of clarification, elaboration, and challenge are used alongside support
and empathy. For example, if a young person describes an incident in which they
self-harmed, the therapist seeks clarification about what was happening during the
build-up to the incident. The therapist might then work to engage the patient in thinking
about the steps from the (social) trigger that stimulated such feelings of hurt and upset
in them.Working with Adolescents 331
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Clinical Example: Holly
Holly reported having had a terrible day at school that week; once she got home, she
binged on junk food and then self-harmed. On being asked to say a little about what had
gone on at school, she said: “I hate school. I just hate it, that ’s all—I just spend the whole day
thinking ‘I hate this and I don ’t want to be here. ’”
The task for the clinician is to find the correct balance between validating and
empathizing with the young person ’s experience, and avoiding feeding the affect by
completely accepting the young person ’s account.
CLINICIAN :I can tell you had a really awful day and how horrible and upsetting school was that day.
And I know you feel you hate school all the time, but can we just think back to that particular day
at school? Tell me about your day, if you can remember. I ’d be interested to know whether there
was anything that made things worse.
As Holly walked the clinician through her school day, it became clear that she had felt
exposed to what she perceived as the humiliating scrutiny of the group of “popular mean
girls”in her sports lesson, sparking intense feelings of shame and rejection. She had spent
the whole morning in anxious anticipation of the experience, and although in fact nothing
in particular happened during that lesson, she spent the day in a state of extreme anxiety
and discomfort. By going through the detail of the day, the story of heightening affect
became clear, increasing her anxious arousal and leading to a vicious circle of
hypermentalizing about what the girls in the group were thinking. By the time she got
home from school, Holly was so overwhelmed that she felt she could only manage her
state by an act of self-harm. Through careful exploration of the day and the escalating
affect that characterized it, Holly could start to understand her feelings better.
It is important to note that the clinician ’s initial response to Holly ’s upset was support-
ive and validating. Only once Holly felt understood and less alone in how she felt was it
appropriate for the clinician to explore and clarify in more detail, and only when Holly was
clearly more in touch with her mentalizing capacities would it be appropriate to lightly
challenge her perspective, by introducing a less catastrophic view about the other girls in
the class on whom her hypermentalizing stance had become fixed. If such a challenge had
been introduced too early or too dogmatically, it might have left Holly feeling misunder-
stood or criticized.
At the heart of this work of clarification, elaboration, and challenge is careful
attention to affect and affect identification. This emphasis on affect is vital for preventing
the work of mentalizing from slipping into a pseudomentalizing stance in which what
may be going on for someone might be discussed almost as an intellectual exercise (i.e.,
pretend mode; see Chapter 2 ), without sufficient appreciation of the emotional meaning,
which gives whatever is going on its real meaning, nuance, or salience. In elaborating
affect, the clinician seeks to explore the feeling states of the patient empathically.
Basic Mentalizing
Clinical Example: Empathic Exploration
PATIENT :My friend said she was out on the high street and saw my boyfriend talking to another girl.
She said the girl looked really flirty, and I know what a slag she is.
CLINICIAN :So do you know the girl your friend said he was talking to?332 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
PATIENT :No, but I can bet she was a slag. You don ’t have a clue, of course she was or she wouldn ’tb e
talking to him. She just wants to ruin it all for me, by taking him off me.
CLINICIAN :I can see that your friend telling you this about your boyfriend talking to another girl would
make you jealous, especially as you ’ve often thought that about some other girls who you doknow
(the clinician is normalizing ). But what makes you so sure about him wanting to go off with her?
PATIENT :Because I know, that ’s what girls like that do, just to get at me. They just think they can walk
over me as if I don ’t exist and I ’m just not worth anything. It makes me feel like they know how
shit I am and they ’re just showing it to the world.
CLINICIAN :It is really difficult to know how to cope with the feeling of jealousy when someone tells
you something like that, and then it makes you feel so terrible so fast ( the clinician is trying to
identify the effect of the initial emotion ). Let ’s look at how it jumped so far so quickly.
In this moment, the patient has jumped from the feeling of discomfort when she heard
her friend ’s provocative report, to certainty about her boyfriend ’s infidelity, to intense
feelings of low self-worth, with the risk that she will respond to these feelings with an act of
self-harm. The process is one of psychic equivalence (see Chapter 2 ), in which what the
patient believes and fears —about her boyfriend and then about other people ’s perception
of her as worthless —becomes a terrifying truth. Rather than arguing with the patient about
her beliefs, the therapist should empathize without escalating, work to identify and
normalize the affect, and then identify its impact on the patient ’s state of mind.
The central focus of MBT-A is to restore basic mentalizing in young people.
Sometimes young people may find it difficult to pinpoint any clear emotion and how
it relates to their mood. A profile of hopelessness and joylessness can be highly charac-
teristic of distressed young people, and the task of thinking about those feelings, in order
to challenge them, can be an active part of restoring basic mentalizing. This indicates the
way in which mentalizing is not in itself the final objective of MBT. Rather, the purpose
of supporting mentalizing is to make other ways of experiencing oneself and others
possible —in this case, in a way that makes pleasure possible.
Let us return to the case of Maya, who found it difficult to think about her own or
other people ’s mental states. When Maya returned home from school, she shut herself in
her room and attempted to sleep all afternoon and evening. This caused her to fall
behind with her schoolwork, leaving her more stressed, and she would be unable to sleep
at night, so would end up lying in bed scrolling through social media.
Clinical Example: Mentalizing the Relationship
CLINICIAN :When you have these feelings of being very tired and just wanting to sleep when you get
stressed out about school, I wonder if that ’s about trying to escape from how you ’re feeling ( not-
knowing exploration ).
MAYA:I don ’t know. I just get tired and stressed out and it ’s the only way to get a break from
the stress.
CLINICIAN :It must be exhausting, feeling that tired and worn out by everything that ’s been going on
(initial empathy ).Working with Adolescents 333
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
MAYA:Yes. Well, I know I need to change my routine but it ’s so hard when I just want a break and to
sleep. There ’s nothing else that I can do when I ’m so tired.
CLINICIAN :I can see that, it makes me tired, too, just thinking about it. Which makes me wonder if
there ’s something about being tired and wanting to sleep that both of us are doing because we
don’t know what to do! ( The clinician is beginning to mentalize the relationship. )
Mentalizing the Relationship
In the previous clinical example, we see that the clinician introduces something of how
they are feeling —a sense of their response to the feelings of tiredness and the interaction
between Maya and the clinician at that moment, and how it may impact on what is
happening in their work. This is an example of mentalizing the relationship.
Hypermentalizing
One of the areas of research developed by Carla Sharp and her colleagues is the significance
of the phenomenon of hypermentalizing in adolescence [ 9,10]. Hypermentalizing involves
the young person being in a state where they develop an idea about the mental states of
others, or frantically seek to elaborate a theory about what someone else might be thinking
or feeling (often in a way that manifests as quite a persecuted view about the other person ’s
hostility, contempt, or rejection), but this is based on distorted or mistaken beliefs. In
hypermentalizing, there may be excessive certainty about what the other person is thinking
(i.e., psychic equivalence). It can also manifest as a form of pseudomentalizing (or pretend
mode) in which the mental states of others are speculated upon, often with great intensity,
but without sufficient grounding either in the real world or in an awareness of the truth that
an individual simply cannot know what other people are thinking with complete accuracy or
certainty. Sharp and her colleagues found that hypermentalizing may be a characteristic of
young people with borderline personality disorder (BPD) or those who develop BPD later in
life [9,11,12]. Hypermentalizing may also occur in more moderate forms in adolescents who
are experiencing social anxiety —as in the clinical example of Eddie, who would find himself
unhelpfully speculating about the states of mind of his peers or teachers. Hypermentalizing
is not seen exclusively in adolescents, but it can be particularly pronounced in adolescents as
they encounter a wider and more challenging social world. Helping adolescents to reduce
their intense but unsuccessful attempts to “get inside ”the minds of others can be an
important contribution to lessening some of the painfulness and instability of their social
relationships. It is made harder at times because hypermentalizing is to some extent
adaptive, protecting the individual from impulsive action such as self-harm or violence
resulting from a collapse into teleological mode (see Chapter 2 ).
The Alien Self
A key concept that we use to understand the impulse toward self-harm and suicidality is that
of the alien self (see also Chapter 2 ). When an individual ’s capacity to mentalize collapses, in
addition to the emergence of the non-mentalizing modes of functioning, they are also
vulnerable to the overwhelming intrusion of the alien self. To return to our developmental
model of mentalizing, a young child develops an appreciation of their own mind, and then
other people ’s, through experiences —beginning in infancy —of having their subjective state334 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
accurately recognized, mirrored, and responded to by their caregiver. The infant ’se x p e r i e n c e
of having these “secondary representations ”of their mind being reflected back to them helps
their construction of their self-representatio n and agency. Constitutional (i.e., genetic or
biological) vulnerabilities, or exposure to caregiving in which the caregiver is consistently
inaccurate or unmirroring in their responses, can leave the child with a weakened representa-
tion of their own state, which is incompatible with coherent self-representation. For example,
if the caregiver fails to respond to the infant, or if the infant ’s frustration is met by the
caregiver expressing their own anger atthe child (rather than mirroring the infant ’sfrustra-
tion back to them), a mismatched or inaccurate secondary representation of the infant is
generated for them to internalize. The child ’s sense of anger is experienced as a generalized
sense of the world being angry with and at the child, producing an experience of psychic
equivalence. The internalization of this non-contingent representation of the infant ’s state
creates what we describe as the alien self. The representation of the child ’s mind by the
caregiver is necessarily internalized by the infant to forge their sense of self, but the
representation is not properly congruent with the infant ’s self-state, invoking a discontinuity
in the self-structure. Such discontinuity is an aversive experience —it involves the uncomfort-
able sense of holding a feeling, belief, or wish that does not really feel like one ’so w n .
In cases where the alien self has become the vessel for the self-representations arising from
caregiver abuse or neglect, it can be a particularly persecuting presence, and the need to get rid
of it and externalize it may be intensely felt . This need can be manifested by, for example,
provocatively irritating someone else if one is angry, or by generating uncertainty in someone
else if the alien affect is associated with vulner ability. It can also be externalized in relation
to one ’so w nb o d y —in the need for punishment or relief in the form of self-harm or
suicidality. Clinical work in adolescence has frequently revealed the presence of a malignant
alien self which leads to severe internal attacks a nd generates terrifying internal states in which
the young person feels overwhelmingly useless , like a failure, unlovable, hopeless, and so on.
The ferocity of the internal attack is such that it is unbearable, and what makes it particularly
unbearable is that due to the young person ’s lack of capacity to mentalize their experience,
the experience is felt not as a feeling, but as a fact. Therefore the flight into action is necessary.
To return to the clinical example of Eddie, he o ccasionally found that his hypermentalizing
thought processes around a problematic or hos tile peer would create such heightened affect
(anxiety, fear, and feelings of rejection and hostility) that when a difficult or potentially
difficult encounter with that peer loomed, h is capacity to think about what was going on
completely dissolved, and he would lash out wi th quite extreme verbal attacks or threats.
Structure of MBT-A
MBT-A is usually delivered as individual MBT sessions combined with either
mentalization-based family therapy (MBT-F; described in Chapter 15) or group MBT
(MBT-G; described in Chapter 5 ). Usually, individual MBT is combined with both MBT-
G and MBT-F when a more intensive program is indicated. Typically, the individual
MBT-A sessions take place at least weekly, whereas the MBT-F sessions occur less
frequently, perhaps once a month. Treatment normally continues for 12 months.
Assessment
The assessment phase involves the use of diagnostic, cognitive, and mentalizing measures
such as the Reflective Functioning Questionnaire for Youth [ 13]. It also considers familyWorking with Adolescents 335
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
functioning, and the stressors that may disrupt the parents ’mentalizing are identified.
The assessment phase typically lasts for 2 weeks and involves one or two sessions with
individual therapists and one or two sessions with the family therapist. Ideally, the family
therapist and the individual therapist are different individuals.
Initial Phase
Formulation
The initial phase of treatment begins with the patient receiving a written formulation,
followed by a discussion between the patient and the clinician about the formulation.
The same process of providing and discussing a formulation takes place with the parents
in the family component of treatment. Creating the family formulation frequently
highlights —and requires thought about —the fact that different family members may
well have quite different perspectives on the nature of the difficulties the family is facing.
The development of the formulation itself is, as always in MBT, a collaborative effort that
requires acknowledgement and consideration of differences in views.
Crisis Plan
When working with young people who are at higher risk of harming themselves or
others, it is essential to have a very clear crisis plan. As Rossouw [ 6] has pointed out, a
concrete crisis plan is important for two reasons —it helps to provide a way to manage
the risk presented when working with young people, and it provides a supportive and
mentalizing network to scaffold the young people as they seek to manage their emotions
and encounter challenges.
A detailed crisis plan is included in the formulation for the young person. This plan
seeks to highlight factors that might trigger emotional dysregulation and impulsive
behavior, and suggests ways to reinstate mentalizing and, if that fails, sets out alternative
immediate courses of action rather than the dangerous ways forward that the young
person may otherwise use when they are dysregulated and distressed. An example of a
crisis plan (based on Rossouw [ 14], p. 63) is given here.
Clinical Example: Crisis Plan
Trigger factors that you and I identified are times when you feel rejected, humiliated, or
bad about yourself. As we have discussed, these feelings do not just arrive out of the
blue —they are likely to have been triggered in a close relationship. When you have those
feelings you tend to rush into an action to take the feelings away.
When you feel like that again, I would like you to try and stop the action by trying to
delay it for 10 minutes. Then use the 10 minutes to try and reflect on what was happening
a few moments before you had the bad feeling. That might help you to understand more
clearly what it is that you feel as well as what might have happened in a close relationship
which may have contributed to the feeling.
Once you have this understanding more clearly, it may be easier to think about a
solution or to see things from a different perspective. Once that has happened you may
not feel as if you need to rush into action any more.
If that fails and you still feel at risk of harming yourself, try to explore alternatives to self-
harm —do something physical and strenuous like going for a run, try to distract yourself, talk
to a friend or someone you trust, or try to think about a person you know who loves you and
imagine what that person would feel and say to you if you were to talk to them.336 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Sometimes you harm yourself in order to numb yourself emotionally. When you get
into such a state of mind, try to remember that it is not a good state of mind for you to be
in and it is harmful to you.
Try to bring yourself back to reality —do something to occupy yourself, like talking to
someone, playing a game, writing a poem, painting, or watching something that can hold
your attention on television. Don ’t just sit and stare into space with your mind full of
negative thoughts about yourself.
If all else fails, call the clinic and ask to speak to me and I will call you back when I can.
Another crisis plan is presented to the parents. This plan includes some basic education
about self-harm, and advice on how to respond to self-harming behaviors. It includes some
basic safety advice, such as keeping medication locked away or, if relevant, keeping access
to razors or knives restricted. The parents are encouraged to listen, understand, and
communicate to the young person that they are supportive and that they are there for
them. They are encouraged not to panic, blame, or punish the young person.
Contract
The contract is an agreement about the treatment plan, including the duration of
treatment and the commitment required of all participants in the treatment, including
the parents.
Psychoeducation
The formulation session with the family is usually followed by a psychoeducational session.
The purpose of this session is to introduce the underpinning principles of MBT —that
behavior has meaning, that feelings arise in a relational context, and that people have a
powerful emotional impact on one another.
The format of this session can be either a multi-family group or an individual family
session. It is generally approached as a discussion with the family or families using
examples from everyday life to illustrate the main principles. Particularly in a multi-
family group context, it may be helpful to use games, role play, and video materials to
assist the discussion.
Middle Phase
The middle phase of MBT-A usually lasts for 9 –10 months. The overall purpose of this
stage of treatment is to improve the mentalizing skills of the patient and their family.
MBT-A sessions are largely unstructured; this is necessary because the focus of each
session is generally on the young person ’s current or recent interpersonal experiences
and the mental states evoked by these experiences. A key component of the process
involves helping both the young person and their family to achieve better impulse control.
Specific interventions are used to manage suicidal, parasuicidal, and other harmful or
impulsive behaviors such as substance use, threatening behavior, or bingeing and purging.
Final Phase
The aim of the final phase of MBT-A, as with all psychotherapeutic treatments, is to
develop the patient ’s independence. A crucial aspect of achieving this goal is building upWorking with Adolescents 337
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
relational stability and supporting the patient ’s sense of agency and autonomy within
their relational networks. A coping plan is also created so that the patient and their
family know what to do if difficulties recur. The final phase usually lasts for about 2
months, with the appointments becoming more widely spaced toward the end.
Concluding Remarks
The socially responsive nature of the development of mentalizing informs the theory and
practice of MBT-A in three different ways. First, the nature of the work must be
appropriate to the developmental stage —it is essential that the work is informed by an
understanding of the nature of the mentalizing strengths and weaknesses that are typical
of adolescents, and that it is sensitive to the fact that even into late adolescence and young
adulthood the capacity to retain balanced mentalizing remains vulnerable. Second,
developmental processes can lend a certain urgency —an intervention that can support
the adolescent ’s growing capacity to think about mental states may support their
development in different and valuable ways. Third, the emergent mentalizing should
be regarded as a therapeutic opportunity —adolescents are often extremely curious about
other people ’s mental states, and thrive on the opportunity to stimulate those ideas in a
regulated way. The experience of having a secure and robustly mentalizing therapeutic
intervention that explicitly signals an interest in the adolescent ’s mind in a regulated and
non-intrusive way, while also respecting its separateness and agency, can provide a boost
to the adolescent ’s developmental trajectory.
References
1. Dumontheil I, Apperly IA, Blakemore SJ.
Online usage of theory of mind continues
to develop in late adolescence. Dev Sci
2010; 13: 331 –8.
2. Mills KL, Lalonde F, Clasen LS et al.
Developmental changes in the structure
of the social brain in late childhood and
adolescence. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci
2014; 9: 123 –31.
3. Crone EA, Dahl RE. Understanding
adolescence as a period of social-
affective engagement and goal
flexibility. Nat Rev Neurosci 2012; 13:
636–50.
4. Moor BG, Macks ZA, Guroglu B et al.
Neurodevelopmental changes of reading
the mind in the eyes. Soc Cogn Affect
Neurosci 2012; 7:4 4–52.
5. Okonofua JA, Paunesku D, Walton GM.
Brief intervention to encourage empathic
discipline cuts suspension rates in half
among adolescents. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2016; 113: 5221 –6.6. Rossouw T. MBT technique when
working with young people. In: Rossouw
T, Wiwe M, Vrouva I, eds. Mentalization-
Based Treatment for Adolescents:
A Practical Treatment Guide . Abingdon,
UK: Routledge, 2021; 43 –56.
7. Rossouw T, Wiwe M, Vrouva I, eds.
Mentalization-Based Treatment for
Adolescents: A Practical Treatment Guide .
Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2021.
8. Bateman A, Fonagy P. Mentalization-
Based Treatment for Personality
Disorders: A Practical Guide , 2nd ed.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
2016.
9. Sharp C, Vanwoerden S.
Hypermentalizing in borderline
personality disorder: a model and data.
J Infant Child Adolesc Psychother 2015;
14:3 3–45.
10. Bo S, Sharp C, Fonagy P, Kongerslev M.
Hypermentalizing, attachment, and
epistemic trust in adolescent BPD: clinical
illustrations. Personal Disord 2017; 8:
172–82.338 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
11. Sharp C, Ha C, Carbone C et al.
Hypermentalizing in adolescent
inpatients: treatment effects and
association with borderline traits.
J Personal Disord 2013; 27:3–18.
12. Sharp C. The social-cognitive basis of
BPD: a theory of hypermentalizing. In:
Sharp C, Tackett JL, eds. Handbook of
Borderline Personality Disorder in
Children and Adolescents . New York, NY:
Springer, 2014; 211 –26.13. Sharp C, Steinberg L, McLaren V et al.
Refinement of the Reflective Function
Questionnaire for Youth (RFQY) Scale
B using item response theory. Assessment
2022; 29: 1204 –15.
14. Rossouw T. The structure of therapy. In:
Rossouw T, Wiwe M, Vrouva I, eds.
Mentalization-Based Treatment for
Adolescents: A Practical Treatment Guide .
Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2021;
57–73.Working with Adolescents 339
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part IV
Chapter
15Application of Mentalization-Based Treatment in
Different Populations and in Different Settings
Working with Families
Introduction
Mentalization-based treatment for families (MBT-F) has been developed as a way of
integrating the mentalizing approach into existing models of family therapy —a therapist
can use MBT-F either as a stand-alone intervention or as an additional tool to draw on
and to help to shape their thinking. Applying a mentalizing approach to working with
families involves a focus on interactions where mentalizing breaks down and the non-
mentalizing modes come to the fore. Children who are frequently exposed to such
collapses in mentalizing will miss out on the helpful developmental experience of being
exposed to thinking about mental states that drive people ’s behavior in regulated ways.
Typically, a family system suffers a collective crash in mentalizing at times of conflict,
and the emergence of non-mentalizing generates a breakdown in affect regulation, so the
possibility of thinking about what is going on in the minds of fellow family members
becomes overwhelmed.
A mentalization-based family approach often seeks to engage the family in conversa-
tion about typically difficult scenarios in their family life, noticing and drawing attention
to changes in affect and how they influence other family members. The purpose of the
work is to mentalize family behavior, and to draw connections between the mental states
and behavior of the self and others. Many of the techniques used in MBT-F are in fact
well-known, pre-existing systemic practices. However, MBT-F differs from other family
interventions in its explicit focus on mentalizing. A key objective of MBT-F is to develop
the understanding that family members are able to experience in relation to one another
(taking into account the developmental capacities of children and adolescents). Because
MBT-F is not a structured program, we shall describe here some of the key ideas and
techniques used in MBT-F.
The Mentalizing Stance in MBT-F
We have referred to the mentalizing stance throughout this book, and the facets of the
mentalizing stance described in previous chapters apply just as much to MBT-F. As a
reminder for the reader, the mentalizing stance involves the following qualities and
behaviors. It is inquisitive, constantly affirming the value of mentalizing by means of a
respectful, curious, and tentative inquiring attitude. The therapist shows interest but not
certainty in relation to mental states, and openly models their own mentalizing, which
includes an openness about admitting to mentalizing mistakes and breakdowns. Indeed,
these moments of rupture can be useful for restoring co-mentalizing and demonstrating
the lack of certainty with which any of us can know mental states. The stance involves
340
h di 00 98088960 406 blihd li b C bid  i i 
responding in a non-judgmental way to patients ’non-mentalizing, in the first instance
through the use of empathy and validation. As the therapeutic process develops, the
stance evolves to start introducing clarification, affect focus, and elaboration to encour-
age the exploration of mental states. A further process is then introduced, involving
gentle challenge, interruptions of non-mentalizing, and drawing connections.
The task of the MBT-F clinician in maintaining the mentalizing stance is to keep a
balance between observing natural interactions and intervening to promote change by
helping family members to make sense of the feelings that are experienced by each family
member; this also involves highlighting the ways in which miscommunication or
misunderstanding (or lack of understanding) of these feelings leads to interactions that
maintain family problems. Furthermore, the therapist works to interrupt non-
mentalizing interactions and create a context that can help to generate new and different
perspectives. Another important task of the therapist is that of marking and supporting
effective mentalizing , to help to develop the family members ’ability to connect feelings,
thoughts, and intentions positively; this is done by highlighting and discussing examples
of effective mentalizing.
The MBT Loop
One frequently used technique that is available for creating a framework in which
mentalizing can be practiced by a family is the MBT Loop (which is described in more
detail in Chapter 4 ). In the context of family therapy, the “loop”is extended to bring the
family members together so as to create a sense of collectively mentalizing the moment,
while also holding on to the idea that each family member has a different perspective [ 1].
The MBT Loop is initiated by the therapist making an observation about a family
interaction: “I saw that when Josh described how he doesn ’t care when Dad gets angry
when he thinks Josh is being disrespectful both Mum and Dad started to look quite cross,
but Lucy looked a little upset .”The therapist is drawing attention to the observable
emotional responses of the family —external mentalizing —but at this point also needs
to check in on the internal mentalizing of the family members: “Does what I just
described seem right to you, or is it not quite the right description of what ’s going on? ”
In switching to this internal focus, the therapist is modeling a mentalizing stance (not
overly definite, but curious and wanting to explore mental states). By bringing in the
therapist ’s perspective, the interaction is now opened up as something for the family to
consider together.
Assuming that there is some engagement among the family members with what the
therapist has said in initiating the loop, the therapist can expand on the process by
seeking to further “mentalize the moment. ”This involves focusing more closely on the
interaction in the here and now, in order to draw closer attention to thinking about the
mental states behind it. For example, the therapist might say: “If we try to imagine being
in Lucy ’s place at that moment, can we try to imagine what she was feeling or what
thoughts went through her mind when she was looking so sad? ”By wondering what it is
like to be in Lucy ’s shoes, the therapist is deliberately encouraging the parents to
mentalize their child —by looping out of their low mentalizing and focusing on the mind
of another person. On the whole it is better to begin by asking the parents to think about
their child ’s mental states, before asking them to mentalize themselves. Only after the
parents have given some thought to the here-and-now experience of the child might theWorking with Families 341
h di 00 98088960 406 blihd li b C bid  i i 
therapist encourage each parent to explore their own mentalizing in response to the
child —for example, by asking: “Seeing Lucy looking tearful like that, what feelings does
that make you have? ”
After hearing one parent ’s perspective on what was going on for Lucy, the therapist
then expands the MBT Loop to another family member: “So Mum says she thinks Lucy is
relieved that the family is trying to understand each other a bit more instead of shouting at
each other. Dad, what do you think about what was happening for Lucy at that moment? ”
The therapist would ask all the family members for their thoughts on this in a similar
way: “Josh, if Lucy had cartoon thought bubbles coming out of her head, what do you think
they would say? ”The process of the therapist trying to get the whole family to “brain-
storm ”the interaction —being careful to check in with all the family members and to
encourage them to say how they see things, similarly or differently —produces the loop:
“what has been noticed is named and what has been named is questioned, and percep-
tions are checked all round. When family members are encouraged to rewind and review
a specific sequence in this way, a meta-perspective is generated, which can reignite an
effective mentalizing stance ”(Asen and Fonagy [ 1], pp. 28 –9).
In addition to focusing on what is happening in the room, the therapist may ask a
family member to connect the here-and-now mental states with similar situations that
may have arisen in the family, and to connect the interactions that are taking place in the
session with family patterns of behavior. The loop is therefore extended to encompass
wider family patterns and typical scenarios. This encourages family discussions of typical
difficulties, with the therapist working to help to keep the focus on tracing the meanings
and feelings behind these typical behaviors for all of the family members involved.
A simple question from the therapist can help to achieve this: “Have you noticed that
things like this are also happening at home? ...And how might you manage this differently
next time something like this happens? ”(Asen and Fonagy [ 1], p. 29). It is this shift to
generalizing and considering change that aims to stimulate the family members ’own
ideas and solutions. If it leads to proposals by one family member, then this is noticed
and named by the therapist: “I can see that Dad thinks if this happens, Mum should take
him calmly aside and not talk in front of your daughter —have I got that right? ”,and the
“checking ”loop starts again (Asen and Fonagy[ 1], p. 29).
The therapist attempts to slow down the interactions between the family members by
asking questions or highlighting their curiosity about what is going on for each individ-
ual in the interaction. The purpose of introducing this pause into the flow of family
relationships is that it allows more scope for reflective mentalizing. The overall objective
is for the family members to shift their perspective so that they become less caught up in
the specifics of what took place in the session, and develop a more generalized under-
standing of how problematic interactions unfold.
Exercises in MBT-F
MBT-F has developed a range of techniques and borrowed others from systemic family
therapy in order to find ways to restore individual mentalizing and to encourage the
family ’s attention and interest in mental states to be distributed between and across all of
the family members. Exercises in MBT-F are designed to be fun, and they are a further
example of the use of play in MBT. The use of play has been outlined as being
particularly important in work with individuals with avoidant personality disorder (see342 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 406 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Chapter 8 ) and also with children (see Chapter 13 ), although playfulness is an essential
component of all forms of MBT. The exercises do not always require explicit reflection,
but rather the implicit, intuitive understanding of internal states that supports the
creation of a mentalizing culture within a family. MBT-F incorporates this implicit
learning principle by articulating that the main task of the therapist is to construct a
mentalizing culture by facilitating shared reflection on the family members ’
lived experiences.
The exercise known as “stepping into someone else ’s shoes ”was developed to
encourage family members to think about things from each other ’s perspective. It begins
with each family member being asked to take a piece of paper, put it under their feet, and
draw the outline of their shoes. The family is then asked to talk about a recent difficult
interaction or misunderstanding, spending about 5 minutes on this. Each family member
then gets up and moves to the seat of the person on their left, putting their feet on to the
outline of the shoes of the person who had been sitting next to them [ 2]. The therapist
asks questions: “What does it feel like to sit there in these shoes? Are they too big or too
small? Is it a good feeling or a bit uncomfortable? Just imagine you are now that person and
you have to continue the discussion you just had, but from that person ’s standpoint .”In
occupying the “shoes ”of each other, the family members are being encouraged to think
about the issue from each other ’s perspective. This has two benefits. First, the person
who is occupying another person ’s shoes is exercising their capacity to mentalize that
other person, and second, this can generate in the person whose shoes are being occupied
the experience of being recognized, and of their perspective being acknowledged and
understood. The communication of understanding that such an exercise provides will
ideally stimulate openness to further co-mentalizing and reduce epistemic vigilance.
The“body –feeling scan ”is an exercise in which each family member is asked to lie on
a large piece of paper while another family member draws their silhouette around them
[2]. Each family member then draws or paints their feelings into their respective body
outline, using whatever colors, shapes, or images come to mind, and they are asked to
label these feelings. Finally, they show their “scan”to the rest of the family, while
explaining the feelings. The family members might compare where different feelings,
such as worry or anger, are placed in their bodies, and in explaining their scans they
convey exactly how these feelings feel —how some feelings are hard to express, how some
are difficult to control —as well as describing happy or fun feelings that are more
accessible and can be shared with the family. When jealous or angry feelings are
described, this can be an opportunity to talk about how the family member can recognize
them and share them with others, to help to manage these feelings before they become
too intense. Sharing these experiences of feelings and bodily states introduces the idea
that mental states can drive physical states. Behaviors can be mentalized, and further-
more they can be co-mentalized with other family members to help self-regulation and
reduce the sense of isolation and being stuck or overwhelmed in a separated, withdrawn
physical state.
A variation of this exercise is the “mind –brain scan ”[3], in which each family
member is given a simple line drawing of a cross-section of the human brain. Instead
of the anatomically correct depiction of four brain ventricles, this picture of the brain
contains 10 larger and smaller spaces. The family members are asked to imagine what
“goes on in the head ”of another family member and to fill in the spaces with the feelings,
wishes, beliefs, or thoughts they imagine that person has in their mind. In a family ofWorking with Families 343
h di 00 98088960 406 blihd li b C bid  i i 
four, it would be possible to get three mind –brain scans of each member, allowing
thoughtful comparisons to be made about how different perceptions can be formed [ 1].
In this exercise, the contents of the “spaces ”in the brain are important primarily because
they aid communication between the family members. What makes this and the other
games that can be used in MBT-F therapeutic is not just the elaboration of mental states
that they involve —it is also that they allow implicit understanding to be made explicit
through reflection.
Another method for exploring how family members mentalize one another involves
the use of sculptures made with modeling clay. Family members are asked to work
together on a joint sculpture or, alternatively, children and parents can each create their
own sculptures in parallel. The therapist starts the exercise by explaining it to the family
members: “I’d like you to make a sculpture of how you each [or all] see your family now. It
doesn ’t need to be a piece of art, but just a quick way of describing who is in the family,
where everybody is in relation to everyone else, who is seen as being right in the middle of
the family, or most on the outside, or who is in charge and who is not .”When the
sculptures are finished, the sculptor(s) can explain how and why they captured the
family in the particular way that they did. Before or after the sculptor explains their
work, the other family members can be asked how they see the sculpture and what it
conveys about the thoughts and feelings of its maker. The focus can be moved backward
and forward from what was on the mind of the artist when making their sculpture, to
speculating on what is on their mind when they are listening to the other family
members ’descriptions of their work. There is a special value in the activity accompany-
ing the sharing of perspectives. There is nothing “magical ”about family sculptures
showing how a family member views the family structure, or what an individual ’s
experience in the family might be —it is the active engagement with the knowledge that
is presented by all of the family members that generates progress.
Role play, based on psychodrama techniques [ 4,5], is another activity that can
encourage perspective taking. Role plays can be developed based on current or past
problematic interactions, with family members being invited to enact these, and then the
therapist can introduce some thinking about how the situation might have been handled
differently. For example, when parents are invited to attend a session without their
child(ren), they can be asked to think about a typical conflictual scenario and then “enact ”
it [6]. If the situation becomes difficult and heated, the therapist asks the parents to pause
and to consider each other ’s thoughts and feelings. This often proves to be challenging,
in which case the therapist suggests that they “replay ”the argument, but with their roles
swapped —they are asked to swap seats and the mother has to pretend to be the father,
and vice versa, with each having to use the exact lines the other had delivered previously.
An empty chair, possibly with a photo of the child(ren) placed on it, can represent the
child(ren) who are absent from the session. Each parent can then be asked, still in the
role of the other, to come up with some different lines about the same problematic
scenario, with the aim of having a constructive outcome, rather than the typically stuck
one. They can also be asked to imagine themselves in 3 months ’time, when hopefully the
issue is less heated and the relationship has improved, and to role play how a discussion
about a similar problematic scenario might develop then. They are also asked to think
about the imaginary child(ren) sitting on the chair and what they might make of the
conversation. Finally, each parent is asked to adopt the new lines created by the other and
make these their own in a repeat staging of the previously problematic scenario. When344 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 406 blihd li b C bid  i i 
doing little role plays of this nature, the parents will usually come up with more than one
version; this should stimulate mutual curiosity and entails exploring reasons for the
differences in the envisioned possible future scenarios.
When employed by a mentalizing-oriented therapist, the “mind-reading stethoscope ”
can be used to elicit comments on one ’s own thoughts and feelings, as well as those of
others. In a family session, the therapist encourages a child or a teenager (or even an
adult) to see whether they can “hear”something through the stethoscope, placing the
earpieces into their ears and the sensor on the head of another member of the family.
Although the stethoscope is normally used to identify respiratory and cardiovascular
problems (e.g., heart murmurs or lung congestion) rather than to listen to someone ’s
thoughts, it can be surprisingly effective as a prop to enable family members to suspend
their general reluctance to mentalize explicitly about each other and in relation to
delicate issues.
Clinical Example: The Mind-Reading Stethoscope
THERAPIST :(putting the stethoscope on Mum ’s head ): What do you think goes on in there, in your
mum ’s head? Imagine that you could hear what goes on in her brain ...What sort of thoughts or
wishes might she have? Let us just put the stethoscope on that part of her head ...right at the
back of your mum ’s mind? Sometimes people put their secret thoughts or feelings right at the
back of their head ...what do you imagine could those be? And what might she feel there? Or
maybe she feels things somewhere in a different part of her body ...this stethoscope can also
listen to hearts and tummies. Do you think her heart is big enough for more than one child ...
just listen to the part that is there for you ...what is it feeling?
Listening to oneself can be done in a similar way, with the person placing the stethoscope
on their own heart, brain, or abdomen:
THERAPIST :...and listen to yourself for a moment now ...that heart of yours, if it could speak, what
might it say?
With a bit of encouragement, children generally tend to find it easier to make use of
such playful techniques than their parents do —although the parents, encouraged by their
child ’s example, may eventually feel able to use the “mind-reading ”stethoscope themselves.
Placing the sensor of the stethoscope on the organ that needs to be “listened to ”is a simple
device for making the link between the physical and mental worlds, the integration of
which probably developmentally underpins effective mentalizing. But the playfulness also
separates the person from embedded ways of thinking, and light-heartedness reduces
anxiety. What seems like a simple device actually turns out to be quite complicated.
Parents and children can build together their own “parent-o-scopes ”and “child-o-
scopes, ”using cardboard tubes and other materials. The therapist can observe family
processes while the family members construct these pretend instruments together —how
they interact and communicate, who leads and who follows, whether there is any give
and take, and so on. If parents are unwilling or unable to take part in this exercise, the
therapist can supply their own “scopes ”from a stock and allow each family member to
choose one of them. The physical structure of the device concretizes the “viewing ”
process and thus allows effective mentalizing to be kick-started, particularly in situations
where each family member is preoccupied with their own perspective.Working with Families 345
h di 00 98088960 406 blihd li b C bid  i i 
There are obvious variations on this playful activity —for example, the construction
of“teacher-o-scopes, ”“police-o-scopes, ”“best-friend-o-scopes, ”and so on, further
enhancing family members ’ability to view a dilemma, a problem, or a person through
a number of very different lenses. The essence remains the same —the creation or
enhancement of a mentalizing stance in the family by developing increased willingness
to break the mold of psychic equivalence and to question and reflect on assumptions and
enrich the complexity with which others ’perspectives are represented.
Concluding Remarks
In MBT-F, as in all other forms of MBT, mentalizing is the target for treatment. Families
are given psychoeducation about mentalizing during the assessment phase, and are then
asked to apply what they have learned about mentalizing to their problems. Techniques
for encouraging and stabilizing mentalizing within the family follow the MBT model,
with the perspective of each family member being validated and explored. The clinician
then helps the family members to see things from each other ’s perspective. Importantly,
the family are helped to take charge of their difficulties and discuss how they will address
them together while being alert to the dangers of low-mentalizing interactions.
References
1. Asen E, Fonagy P. Mentalizing Family
Violence Part 2: techniques and
interventions. Fam Process 2017; 56:
22–44.
2. Asen E, Fonagy P. Mentalization-
Based Treatment with Families . New
York, NY: The Guilford Press,
2021.
3. Asen E, Fonagy P. Mentalization-based
therapeutic interventions forfamilies. J Fam Ther 2012; 34:
347–70.
4. Moreno JL, Moreno ZT, Moreno J. The
First Psychodramatic Family . Beacon, NY:
Beacon House, 1964.
5. Yablonsky L. Psychodrama: Resolving
Emotional Problems through Role-Playing .
New York, NY: Gardner, 1981.
6. Minuchin S. Families and Family
Therapy . Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1974.346 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 406 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part IV
Chapter
16Application of Mentalization-Based Treatment in
Different Populations and in Different Settings
Working with Couples
Introduction
A couple relationship forms one of the most constant co-mentalizing systems for many
people, one in which familiarity particularly lends itself to automatic mentalizing in day-to-
day functioning. As we mentioned in Chapter 2 , intimate relationships, which by their very
nature activate attachment systems, tend to cut out mentalizing processes. This can generate
scenarios in which mentalizing imbalances can become entrenched, and familiar triggers for
the emergence of non-mentalizing modes can be readily enacted. However, a couple
relationship can also form an environment in which the potential for salutogenic (resilience-
and wellbeing-enhancing) co-mentalizing is rich. Mentalization-based treatment (MBT),
with its focus on modeling, supporting, and restoring mentalizing and epistemic trust and
the associated capacity to learn socially and emotionally in close relationships, is particularly
well suited to thinking about and working with couples. In this chapter, we shall outline the
structure and techniques of MBT for couples (MBT-CO), a form of working that has been
developed primarily by Efrain Bleiberg and Ellen Safier with Peter Fonagy [ 1].
Structure of MBT-CO
MBT-CO starts with an initial assessment of the couple ’s history, functioning, and the
extent to which they are able to maintain —and recover —a mentalizing position within
the relationship, which involves:
/C15each partner having a sense of being recognized and understood by their partner
/C15a common feeling of safety and trust, characterized by the idea that each partner can
assume that their partner is “on their side ”
/C15finding in each other an “epistemic partner, ”who shares their knowledge about the
world and about what is going on for the couple in relation to each other and the
outside world
/C15the relationship working both as a “secure base ”that invites exploration, playful
interactions, and new learning and discovery, and as a “safe haven ”
/C15the relationship being able to maintain a balance between closeness and the erotically
charged “otherness ”that generates sexual intimacy and pleasure [ 2].
The initial assessment phase involves exploring how the partners in a couple relate to
each other, and identifying to what extent the five qualities listed are present in the
relationship, what kind of interactions undermine them, and the moments when non-
mentalizing modes of functioning emerge. Specific patterns of interaction —those
moments or scenarios in which mentalizing and trust are more likely to break down —
are asked about and considered.
347
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Clinical Example: Breakdown of Mentalizing and Trust
Taking the example of a couple who have a young child, the refusal of the child to eat the
meal that one parent has prepared might lead to a stand-off between the parent and the
child, with the parent feeling increasingly irritable and frustrated. The other parent may
appear on the scene and attempt to break the impasse by soothing the increasingly upset
child, leaving the first parent feeling unsupported and rejected by both their partner and
the child, not helped by the second parent ’s irritation about the situation and protective-
ness toward the child. A cycle of defensiveness is created, in which teleological mode (the
child must eat and the second parent must get the child to eat, in order to show affection
and support for the first parent) and psychic equivalence (the first parent feels hurt and
frustrated by the child ’s refusal to eat, so the child is hostile, stubborn, and rejecting —and
their partner is, too, in their “complicity ”with the child) emerge. What began as a difficult
interaction between one parent and the child becomes a crisis between the couple,
underpinned by a lack of trust in the other ’s intentions —the intervention of the second
parent is not thought about by the first parent as an attempt to break up a difficult
moment, but rather as an attack.
The assessment comprises one or two sessions with the couple, followed by one or
two separate sessions with each of them individually. In these sessions, the therapist tries
to develop a clear understanding of the difficulties that brought the couple to treatment,
their individual history (particularly their attachment history), the couple ’s history, and
their mentalizing strengths and vulnerabilities.
In the individual sessions, the therapist explores each partner ’s family of origin,
relationship history, and views of current strengths (i.e., what they value in their partner
and in the relationship and would not want to change) and difficulties, as well as their
commitment to the relationship and to the process of therapy, which seeks to address
challenges and repair problems. The individual sessions also offer an opportunity to
assess each partner ’s personality, attachment style, level of functioning (i.e., their rigidity,
flexibility, coping strategies, cognitive style, and patterns of communication), and their
compatibility with their partner. In addition, the individual sessions are used to raise any
matters that would be difficult to discuss in the presence of the partner (e.g., physical
and/or mental health problems, substance abuse, worries about safety or violence,
infidelity, trauma), which both exacerbate and are exacerbated by difficulties in menta-
lizing. The raising of such issues demands careful thought from the therapist about how
to approach supporting the couple in relation to the things that they may be keeping
secret from each other, safety and the possibility of creating a safe therapeutic environ-
ment, and the appropriateness and readiness of the couple for therapy.
After completion of these joint and individual assessment sessions, a joint session is
held in which the therapist presents a formulation for consideration. The formulation
explains the therapist ’s perception of the couple ’s strengths and weaknesses, and
draws particular attention to their mentalizing strengths and vulnerabilities, and their
difficulties in trusting and learning. The formulation also suggests a possible path to
recovery in terms of couple functioning. As with other types of MBT, the formulation
can be presented verbally or in writing; if the formulation is written, it will provide
a useful document to refer to and for reviewing progress in the therapy. Remember
that the formulation is always very much a “work in progress ”rather than a final
document.348 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
The assessment and formulation-sharing stage can also be used to introduce and
define some ideas about mentalizing and epistemic trust, and to explain the process of
MBT. This educational process usually involves an explanation of how mentalizing
develops in the context of attachment relationships, and how mentalizing tends to break
down when people are defensive or when their attachment systems are highly activated.
The consequences of breakdowns in mentalizing in terms of closing the channel for
epistemic trust and social communication within the couple are also described, in an
attempt to convey the idea that mentalizing is not an end in itself but part of an ongoing
cyclical process of communication and openness to communication. Some educational
material, such as reading matter and video clips, can also be provided.
As part of the discussion of the formulation, the therapist proposes a treatment
structure, which typically involves a weekly session with the couple, and the option of
further individual sessions. In addition, one or both of the partners may be referred to
individual psychotherapy, medication management, or alcohol and substance use treat-
ment. These options will be suggested as indicated when one or both partners present
with significant mental health problems or when breaches of trust, such as infidelity,
are apparent.
The Mentalizing Stance in MBT-CO
MBT-CO is built around two key features:
1. the therapist ’s mentalizing stance ( “how to be ”)
2. the spectrum of interventions available to the therapist ( “what to do ”).
We have described the mentalizing stance in detail in Chapters 3 and4, and we have
referred to it throughout this book. It is a therapeutic stance characterized by a “not-
knowing ”approach that is open, curious, and non-judgmental in relation to mental
states, and it is a fundamental practice on which any MBT work is based. Certain aspects
of the mentalizing stance deserve particular attention in work with couples, and we shall
briefly focus on these here.
Holding the Balance
Effective mentalizing involves maintaining a flexible balance between the four dimen-
sions of mentalizing (see also Chapter 2 )—between attending to self and paying attention
to the other, between affect and cognition, between automatic and controlled mentaliz-
ing (which is more available when stress and arousal are reduced), and between mental-
izing based on internal and external features and experiences as played out by the
different people in the room. The clinician gauges the state of mentalizing and arousal
of both partners and how an interaction is affecting them, and allows each partner to
communicate their experience and feel heard and understood by their partner and
the therapist.
Interrupting Non-Mentalizing
A central tenet of MBT-CO is that non-mentalizing tends to emerge as a defensive
mechanism during a difficult interaction. This can then cause a negative spiral as the
non-mentalizing behavior causes further difficulties and is liable in turn to trigger non-
mentalizing in the partner. Therefore, when non-mentalizing functioning becomesWorking with Couples 349
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
apparent during a session, an intervention by the therapist is indicated. The first
requirement is for the therapist to recognize that there has been a breakdown in
mentalizing, either in one or both of the partners or in the therapist. Non-mentalizing
by the clinician is indicated by them arguing with one or both partners, becoming
excessively definite about what is happening for the couple, or finding it difficult to hold
on to the different points of view of the people in the room. Once the breakdown in
mentalizing has been identified, the clinician needs to interrupt the process. One method
of doing this is to take a momentary break to allow the therapist to step back and think
about what is going on —for both the therapist and the couple.
Highlighting and Marking Mentalizing
Another way in which the therapist displays attentiveness to what is going on in terms of
mentalizing is by identifying and marking moments of effective mentalizing on the part
of one or both partners. Effective mentalizing can be found in moments when a partner
shows evidence of being curious, respectful, and interested in understanding the other ’s
perspective, or of being aware of the impact that they are having on the other. It can also
be found when an individual is able to express feelings of vulnerability without becoming
defensive or excessively dysregulated, or can accept responsibility for mistakes or the
pain they may have caused.
The Spectrum of Interventions in MBT-CO
The interventions described here provide the MBT-CO therapist with suggestions on
ways to respond to the couple ’s current levels of mentalizing. These techniques have been
described in more detail elsewhere in this book, as they are used in different MBT
programs. Here we describe these interventions in the context of working with couples
and the particular considerations and extensions to therapeutic working that the couple
environment requires.
Empathy, Support, and Validation
In MBT-CO, the task is not only for the therapist to support and validate the partners in
the sessions, but also to help each partner to cease invalidating the other and to develop a
more empathic stance toward them. The therapist is treating the relationship itself rather
than the individuals, and so they also work to support and validate the couple ’s attempts
to develop a more mentalizing relationship, empathizing with the challenges and effort
that this may involve for the couple. One approach to scaffolding a mentalizing stance in
a couple is for the therapist to hold a supportive and empathic conversation with each
partner in the presence of the other, who is asked to listen and try to understand.
Clarification, Affect Focus, and Elaboration
Once the partners in the couple are beginning to show some reflective curiosity and
more compassionate openness toward each other, the therapist can start to develop their
mentalizing capacity further by introducing the technique of clarification and elabor-
ation. This process seeks to reconsider what was going on in an interaction that
culminated in a breakdown in mentalizing, by asking for the details of the feelings and
thoughts that each partner had as the difficult interaction was unfolding. Developing this350 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
account of an interaction can involve the use of “rewind and reflect ”—a technique in
which the therapist asks the couple to trace back and pinpoint the last moment at which
they felt as if they were able to think clearly and respond to each other more freely. The
therapist then starts a mentalizing functional analysis (see Chapter 4 ), which involves
elaborating in detail how each person ’s mental states changed in response to what they
saw as the meaning behind each moment in the interaction. In this process, the therapist
works to draw out and open up the hidden feelings of anxiety and vulnerability that often
drive what manifests as defensive distancing activity —this is an intervention that some
individuals might experience as quite challenging. The exploration of meanings may lead
the partners to consider their earlier experiences, whether as a couple, in previous
relationships, or in their families of origin.
Challenge and the Therapeutic Bargain
When the partners in the couple have reached a point at which they are able to work
cooperatively with each other and with the therapist, the use of challenge can be
introduced. This technique can be particularly useful in couples where there is an
element of pretend mode going on in the cooperation, particularly if this involves
ignoring or downplaying significant or worrying/damaging behavior, such as substance
abuse or other addictive behavior, infidelity, or undisclosed financial decisions or secrets
that could put the partnership at risk.
Challenge may typically involve looking at the potential downsides of changing a
behavior, even one that appears problematic. The therapist may be quite explicit about
the fact that they are moving into difficult territory —for example, they might say “I hope
you will bear with me but I think this is really important .”Facing an uncomfortable
experience of sharing vulnerability is difficult and requires skill. The dilemma is whether
to retain defensive, non-mentalizing approaches that provide a semblance of control,
safety, and protection, or whether to take the risk involved in giving up those protections
to allow a more honest and supportive relationship of trust and co-mentalizing.
Repairing Mentalizing and Epistemic Trust in the Here and Now
The greatest mentalizing demand for the partners in a couple is to expose their vulner-
abilities to each other and to maintain trust and mentalizing in the face of intense
emotions. The greatest likelihood of generating a virtuous cycle of social learning in a
relationship is built on the development of a safe haven and a secure base for each other.
This capacity to repair offers each partner the best chance of acquiring a set of tools that
can be generalized to other relationships outside the couple and to other contexts outside
the treatment relationship, reinstating the resilience-enhancing possibilities of
social learning.
The therapist ’s readiness to take responsibility for their own mistakes and misattune-
ments, and the pain that these cause, sets the stage for a different kind of interaction.
Here the therapist is holding themselves accountable in the relationship in a way that
parallels what they hope for with the couple they are treating. Apologizing to the couple
when these situations arise, and encouraging them to initiate this crucial step within their
relationship, opens the door to greater intimacy. When each member of the couple can
own their mistakes and genuinely appreciate the impact that they have on their partner,
they then become able to express with humility and conviction a desire to earn theirWorking with Couples 351
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
partner ’s trust. It is often helpful to educate couples about the rules of effective apology
[3]. In encouraging apologies, the therapist highlights the fact that repairing ruptures in
the relationship requires first the capacity to take responsibility —not for the other
person ’s feelings, but for our own hurtful actions. In order to take responsibility, we
must first be interested in and then willing to learn about our partner ’s perspective, and
we have to tolerate the fact that we inevitably fall short of our partner ’s needs and wishes
and are likely to disappoint our partner sometimes, no matter how hard we try.
Concluding Remarks
MBT-CO follows clear principles of intervention to promote mentalizing in the couple
relationship. As we have emphasized throughout this book, non-mentalizing leads to
more non-mentalizing, and nowhere is this better exemplified than in couples who are
struggling to relate to each other constructively.
References
1. Bleiberg E, Safier E. Couples therapy. In:
Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds. Handbook of
Mentalizing in Mental Health Practice ,
2nd ed. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association Publishing, 2019;
151–68.2. Perel E. Mating in Captivity: Unlocking
Erotic Intelligence . New York, NY:
HarperCollins, 2006.
3. Lerner H. Why Won ’t You Apologize?
Healing Everyday Hurts and Big Betrayals .
New York, NY: Gallery Books,
2017.352 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 40 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part IV
Chapter
17Application of Mentalization-Based Treatment in
Different Populations and in Different Settings
Mentalizing in Other Settings
Introduction
A mentalizing individual will reflect, empathize with the self and others, modulate affect
fluctuations, set boundaries, and have a strong sense of agency. The same principles can be
applied to social groups. Dysfunctional social systems cause the collapse of mentalizing and
result in highly reactive, tense, and defensive interactions. In Chapter 2 we discussed the
relationship between mentalizing, epistemic trust, and the generation of a “we-mode ”of
social cognition. We set out how breakdowns in mentalizing might be so detrimental to
social function because they trigger the closure of epistemic trust in social communication
and preclude the formation of the we-mode with others; joining together in thinking with
others becomes aversive or simply inaccessible because of the impossibility of an accurate
“epistemic match. ”We have recently thought about this issue in relation to culture and
psychopathology, and have argued that exposure to a non-mentalizing social environment
—for example, in the form of socioeconomic alienation and inequality —is linked to a higher
risk of psychopathology because such experiences disrupt the loosely coupled systems of
mentalizing, epistemic trust, and joint attention [ 1]. A non-mentalizing social system creates
vulnerability in that it reduces mentalizing; furthermore, it undermines access to the
protection and support that are provided by social communication and joint attention, with
the sense of social inclusion that they bring. In this chapter we shall discuss areas in which
mentalizing work has been applied to thinking about wider social systems, developing
mentalizing-informed approaches that do not involve a standard MBT clinical program.
AMBIT: Mentalizing the Professional Community
AMBIT (Adaptive Mentalization-Based Integrative Treatment) is a relatively new
approach to creating a mentalizing treatment community in teams working with indi-
viduals who have mental health and social problems that are often complex and
interacting [ 2]. The AMBIT model was developed for use when working with young
people with complex histories of drug abuse, criminality, severe mental health problems,
experience of social care and a history of failed placements, and, most characteristically,
the simultaneous involvement of a large number of helping professionals (e.g., therapists,
outreach workers, youth workers) and services (e.g., education, social care, criminal
justice system). Those working with such young people have frequently experienced loss
of courage and motivation as their offers of help have been rejected or, even when they
have been accepted, generally found to be inadequate. AMBIT has adopted a mentalizing
framework as a common language that offers the potential for a shared perspective on
353
h di 00 98088960 408 blihd li b C bid  i i 
the challenges that young people with multiple problems present to the helping systems
around them. The approach is well documented and has its own website and “wiki
manual ”(https://manuals.annafreud.org/ambit/ ), which can be dynamically updated by
teams who have been trained in AMBIT as they develop and record (manualize) their
practice. It has been enthusiastically adopted by combinations of services, and several
thousand workers in teams in the UK and a growing number of other countries in
Europe have been trained in the approach.
AMBIT starts with the assumption that the young person/client has probably rejected
help for a good reason, that their mistrust is justified, and that their attitude has adaptive
value. Similarly, a mentalizing stance is adopted in relation to the workers involved in
such cases. Anxiety about the case is in most instances justified, but feeling ashamed
about inadequate progress can be counterproductive because it reduces the likelihood of
the worker seeking help from other sources. AMBIT focuses on the lack of integration
(termed “dis-integration ”in AMBIT terminology) of helping services around the young
person, and accepts that this is the natural resting state of complex networks, rather than
the consequence of individual acts that could be interpreted as resulting from laziness,
incompetence, or even malice. The approach proposes that what needs to be reversed is
the dis-integration and simultaneous demoralization of the system, which reflects the
breakdown of trust between the professionals and services that make up the helping
system. When the system contains little or no epistemic trust, change is impossible.
The commonly advocated model for complex cases is “the team around the client. ”In
these instances, often, each of the committed professionals involved in helping a young
person feels that they are making an essential and unique contribution to supporting the
young person. Yet, for the young person themselves or their family, the involvement of
multiple professionals and services is seen as confusing and sometimes intrusive. It
would be challenging for anyone to have to integrate the multiple perspectives and
disparate philosophies of specialized agencies working in domains such as education,
social care, and mental health —but for individuals who have great difficulty in under-
standing even one perspective that is distinct from their own, the task of reconciling and
genuinely grasping several understandings is mind-boggling.
Based on the principle of epistemic trust and its roots in attachment theory, AMBIT
favors the use of an individual keyworker —the person whose relationship with the client
is strong and who is most likely to be trusted by them. What often requires attention and
adjustment is the connection of this keyworker to the other professionals and teams
involved in the case. The keyworker with such privileged access to the young client
deserves the respect and comprehensive support of all the other workers and teams. In
this model, all professionals —for example, the therapist, psychiatrist, social worker, and
youth justice worker —work through the keyworker. All of them can make systemic
inputs through this much simpler —and for the young person far less confusing —route.
Thus, although working in multiple domains remains possible, the keyworker retains
responsibility for integrating these domains.
The AMBIT model is structured by four core areas of practice, known as the
quadrants of the AMBIT wheel [ 2], all of which need to be attended to for the work of
helping clients to be safe and effective. These are:
1. working with your client
2. working with your team354 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 408 blihd li b C bid  i i 
3. working with networks
4. learning at work.
Only one of these quadrants deals directly with the client; the radical aspect of
AMBIT is that it assumes that the mentalizing capacity of individual workers, teams,
and their wider professional networks is just as critical to providing effective help as
working to support the clients.
AMBIT has the virtue of simplifying great complexities. Rather than presenting
approaches that are the product of high-level thinking in neuroscience, learning theory,
cognitive –behavioral therapy, social ecology, systems theory, attachment theory, and
psychoanalysis, among others, AMBIT draws on mentalizing theory, which offers a
common language and models the integration that AMBIT strives to achieve. In an
analogous way, the role of the keyworker represents a single pathway between the young
person and their family and the professional systems, managed by the most trusted
individual, regardless of their original location in the professional network. Whereas in
the“team around the client ”approach the emphasis tends to be on rules and skills, the
“team around the worker ”approach proposed by AMBIT emphasizes relationships.
CAPSLE: A Mentalizing Program for Schools
The mentalizing approach for schools discussed here is Creating a Peaceful School
Learning Environment (CAPSLE), a mentalization-based program for dealing with
aggression and bullying in troubled school environments. CAPSLE is a whole-school
approach that attempts to develop a mentalizing climate in which individual acts of
violence or bullying are recognized and challenged, so that when such incidents do occur
they do not escalate and gain social currency [ 3,4]. CAPSLE has four components.
1. A “positive climate ”campaign uses reflective discussions of incidents immediately
after these have occurred; the discussions take place in the classroom and are led
by counselors.
2. A classroom management plan enhances the teachers ’discipline skills by focusing
on understanding and correcting problems at their root, rather than punishing and
criticizing only the behaviors that are apparent. For example, problem behavior in a
single child is conceptualized as a problem for all of the pupils in the class, who —
often unwittingly —engage in bully, victim, or bystander roles. This approach reduces
scapegoating, and it also means that insight into the meaning of the behavior
becomes paramount.
3. A physical education program , derived from a combination of role playing,
relaxation, and self-defense techniques, teaches children skills for dealing with
victimization and bystanding behavior. This component of the program helps
children to protect themselves and others by using non-aggressive physical and
cognitive strategies. For example, enacting bully –victim –bystander roles in role plays
provides pupils with the opportunity to work out alternative actions to fighting.
Learning ways to react (e.g., when grabbed, pushed, or punched), coupled with
classroom discussion, teaches personal self-control as well as respect for and
helpfulness toward others.
4. Schools may put in place a peer mentorship and/or an adult mentorship program .
The mentoring relationships that develop in these programs provide additionalMentalizing in Other Settings 355
h di 00 98088960 408 blihd li b C bid  i i 
containment and modeling to assist children in mastering the skills and language to
deal with power struggles. For example, mentors might teach children how to referee
games or resolve playground disputes, as well as the importance of helping others.
School is usually the main and most important social environment that children and
young people encounter as they begin to experience the world beyond their family
system. It can provide a crucial lesson in reinforcing their perceptions of the world as
safe and reliable —or as dangerous and unpredictable. Although secure early parent –
child attachment increases the likelihood of a positive developmental outcome [ 5],
peer—not parental —support and acceptance turns out to be the best predictor of
resilience in adolescence [ 6]. However, the mechanisms that we have identified in the
context of studying early development [ 1] may well apply to understanding how the
social environment of adolescents can generate risk. Epistemic trust can be understood as
expressing a generalized trust in one ’s social community. Shared intentionality ( “we-
mode ”) may be experienced by the individual at a group level as well as an inter-
individual level, and is related to the expectation that the social environment will protect,
care for, and help to realize their aims and ambitions. Non-mentalizing social systems
present a powerful cue that the individual is in an environment where social relation-
ships are not operating on the principle of shared goals, cooperation, and interdepend-
ence. The school environment is a powerful tool for shaping the stance of children and
adolescents in relation to social communication.
CAPSLE focuses on the power dynamics in the relationship between bullies, victims,
and bystanders, and emphasizes the role of bystanders in restoring mentalizing. Bystanders
are trained to act to encourage bullies, victims, and other bystanders to recognize, and
move away from, their respective “pathological ”roles. In a non-mentalizing environment,
the witness to a power struggle or an act of violence —the bystander —may experience
sadistic feelings of pleasure in seeing another ’s difficulty or suffering. According to our
thinking, this is only possible when the witnesses feel distanced from the internal world of
the other person, and are able to use the victim to contain the unwanted (usually
frightened) part of themselves. The enjoyment and excitement that bystanding groups
often show when witnessing fights or aggression in violent schools —for example, the
crowding around fights and stirring up of grudges that often take place —do not involve
complete mentalizing failure, because some level of empathy is necessary for this projective
identification with the victim ’s suffering. However, the mentalizing that does take place is
highly limited by the social setting, such that the victim ’s suffering is not fully represented
as a mental state in the bystander ’s own consciousness —that is, it is recognized but not felt
by the bystander. It is not surprising that such a dynamic unfolds in schools, as mentalizing
is a fragile capacity until early adulthood (or even later in life), and it requires a social
environment that can scaffold it and ensure that the mental states of self and other can be
reflected upon. CAPSLE constitutes a deliberate attempt to scaffold the imbalanced,
fluctuating, and incompletely emerging mentalizing capacities of children and young
people (and the school staff who react to them) by creating a social environment in which
more balanced mentalizing can be practiced and reinforced, and its benefits experienced.
Working with Parents, Carers, and Families in Wider Settings
The next group of interventions —Reflective Parenting, Reflective Fostering, and
Minding the Baby —are all highly creative ways in which mentalizing theory has been356 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 408 blihd li b C bid  i i 
applied to supporting families and carers outside a mainstream clinical setting. They are
forms of work that can take place in community settings, and often seek to develop a
community of support among the individuals who are being supported. The work that
we describe here is not a typical program of more formal mentalization-based treat-
ments, but rather it involves forms of working with families that use the idea of
mentalizing and a focus on the value of mentalizing in supporting functioning.
Reflective Parenting
Reflective Parenting is a form of help for families in which a focus on mentalizing is
central [ 7]. It places a strong emphasis on putting into effect the reflective self to help
parents to develop a more attuned and connected relationship with their child(ren). Self-
mentalizing plays a key role in the Reflective Parenting model and is the first step for
parents in this work. The program centers around a highly pragmatic approach that
takes full account of the stresses and strains of family life and how these inevitably lead to
moments of mentalizing difficulty.
The Reflective Parenting program has adopted an innovative approach to helping
families to develop healthy relationships and respond to family difficulties, and helping
parents to support children and young people with emotional and behavioral problems
[7]. The parent ’s ability to understand their child ’s state of mind is often referred to as
parental reflective functioning . This construct emerged from the well-known London
Parent –Child Project study, in which ground-breaking findings showed that there was a
high level of concordance between a parent ’s patterns of attachment and those of their
child [ 8]. It was suggested that this relationship was shaped by the parent ’s capacity to see
the child as a separate psychological entity with a mental experience of their own [ 9]. In
addition to this, the parent ’s ability to not only perceive but then also reflect back the
mental state of the child and respond through their own behavior was seen to be strongly
linked to attachment security. This led to the development of the Reflective Self-Function
Scale and the subsequent development of the Reflective Functioning Scale [ 10], a
significant measure of parents ’capacity to understand their own mental states. This
ability to have a “reflective self ”is a careful interplay between reflecting on the self
(parental) state of mind and turning this reflective capacity to the state of mind of the
developing child. This balance is key to work that aims to increase a parent ’s capacity to
mentalize, as parental mentalizing (reflective functioning) is not simply about the
parent ’s capacity to reflect on their child, but also about their capacity to reflect on their
own mental activity.
Two key tools have been developed for use in the Reflective Parenting model (and
also, in modified form, in the Reflective Fostering program, which is described later in
this chapter). The first of these is the Parent Map. Based on the idea that the capacity to
self-mentalize is critical for affect regulation, particularly during an affect-laden experi-
ence, the Parent Map helps parents to recognize their current state of mind and the
different experiences that play into this —both immediate experiences, and their family
history and their own early experiences. In particular, it aims to help them to identify
experiences that may spark intense emotions and risk a loss of mentalizing and affect
regulation. Parents are helped to build a map of how they want to parent and when they
parent at their best. To support the parent ’s capacity to mentalize their child, the second
tool, known as the Parenting APP, has been developed. The name of this tool is based onMentalizing in Other Settings 357
h di 00 98088960 408 blihd li b C bid  i i 
the initials of three key aspects of a mentalizing stance toward others: Attention and
curiosity, Perspective taking, and Providing empathy. The Parenting APP is used to draw
the parent ’s attention toward what their child is experiencing that may be shaping their
behavior [ 11].
Reflective Parenting is a model for parents of children of all ages, abilities, and levels
of difficulty. The model aims to:
1. encourage professionals who are working with parents to take a mentalizing stance
toward the parents; as a result, the parents feel understood, which helps them to begin
to mentalize
2. increase the parents ’awareness of their own mind, particularly in relation to
parenting
3. provide psychoeducation to enable parents to develop their knowledge of how
understanding feelings (both their own and those of their child) links to managing
feelings and behavior
4. help parents to become aware that understanding the “back story ”that lies behind
why their child behaves in a particular way will lead to a better connection between
the parents and the child
5. increase the parents ’ability to help their child to understand how they are feeling
and why.
One of the ways in which Reflective Parenting help is offered is in a program of group
sessions. The core objective of the program is to promote parents ’ability to understand
their own and their children ’s thoughts, feelings, and needs —or, put more simply, to
improve their capacity to mentalize. The group follows an 8-week program. The first
week introduces Reflective Parenting, including the research behind it, and explains how
it can be helpful and the impact that it can have. In this session, the group members have
a chance to get to know each other and to hear about each other ’s children. In weeks
2 and 3, the impact of the parents ’own states of mind on parenting is explored with the
help of the Parent Map. In week 4, the parents think about the “back story ”to their
child ’s behavior and explore different perspectives and ways to understand the meaning
behind it. This helps parents to take a developmental perspective (understanding what
behaviors are common and to be expected) and to examine their own assumptions about
their child ’s intentions. In this session, the reflective or mentalizing stance to parenting is
introduced, which can enable the parents to understand their child in a different way,
and in turn help the child to manage their feelings and behavior with the parents ’help. In
week 5, the emphasis is on helping the parents to manage both their own and their child ’s
“emotional temperature ”in order to achieve a better relationship. In weeks 6 and 7,
issues around discipline and authority within the parent –child relationship are con-
sidered. The final session, in week 8, focuses on how parents can keep Reflective
Parenting going, looking to the future, and helping parents to consider how they can
enjoy better times with their child.
Reflective Fostering
Another area of recent interest for mentalizing approaches is the application of mental-
izing thinking to the needs of looked-after children. This is an area of considerable need.
In March 2021, the number of children being looked after by local authorities in England358 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 408 blihd li b C bid  i i 
was 80,850, a figure that has risen year on year [ 12], and an increasing number of looked-
after children are being fostered rather than placed in residential homes [ 13]. This
movement toward fostering has been undertaken in recognition of the fact that chil-
dren ’s development is best served by stable, predictable relationships provided by present
and available caregivers [ 14]. The Reflective Fostering Programme (RFP) was developed
in response to the fact that despite the clear potential advantages of fostering as an
intervention for looked-after children, the emotional work and the emotional demands
of fostering have traditionally been given insufficient attention [ 13,15]. Children in foster
care are more than five times as likely to have a diagnosable mental health disorder as
children in the general population, with a reported prevalence of 72% [ 16].
Further vulnerability and instability are generated when foster placements break
down; placement instability is estimated to be 22 –56%. Breakdown in placements is
associated with poorer outcomes for the children —multiple disruptions are associated
with increased physical, emotional, and behavioral problems. Therefore fostering as an
intervention has a considerable amount riding on it —it has the potential to be a highly
valuable form of help for some of the most vulnerable children, and placement stability is
of considerable importance. But at the same time, foster carers are often not provided
with sufficient training and support for the important work that they undertake. The
existing interventions and training program for foster carers have tended to focus on
managing children ’s challenging behavior. Given that attachment and relational difficul-
ties tend to be more prevalent among looked-after children, the RFP was designed with
these needs in mind. The RFP builds on research which indicates that improving a
parent ’s capacity to mentalize both their own and their child ’s behavior may help them to
respond better to worrying or difficult behavior, and to more effectively support the
emotional well-being of the child. When a child feels that they are being mentalized, they
feel more recognized and understood, and this creates in them a stronger sense of agency
and personal value. Research has shown that good parental mentalizing is associated with
better socio-emotional and cognitive outcomes in children, and reduces the risk of poor
mental health outcomes later in life [ 17]. The RFP builds on the Reflective Parenting
model that we discussed earlier, which promotes both self-focused and child-focused
reflective functioning in the context of managing stress and heightened emotional states.
The RFP uses a set of tools that represent the principles of Reflective Parenting in a
brief, highly engaging form, for foster carers to use on themselves and on the children in
their care. Unlike other mentalization-based interventions for fostered and adopted
children, which were designed to be delivered by mental health professionals, the RFP
was designed to be easily learned by social care professionals so that it could be
implemented and tailored to fit the needs of a wide range of foster carers. The evaluation
of a pilot program showed that it was feasible to train National Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) staff —social workers experienced in working in chil-
dren ’s social care settings —to deliver the program, that foster carers were eager to attend
the course, and that most of them stayed for the entire program. The program was also
found to have a real impact on reducing stress levels for foster carers and improving
relationships between carers and the children they were looking after [ 18].
The RFP is a group-based program to support foster carers of children, initially
between 4 and 11 years of age; it has subsequently been extended to children up to the
age of 13 years. The RFP is psychoeducational in focus and teaches the practical
application of the principles of reflective caregiving. The program consists of 10 sessions,Mentalizing in Other Settings 359
h di 00 98088960 408 blihd li b C bid  i i 
each 2 –3 hours in duration, held over a period of 12 –14 weeks, in groups consisting of
6–10 foster carers. The RFP seeks to provide practical and realistic ways for carers to
develop and maintain supportive relationships with the children they are caring for. Two
key tools that are used in the RFP are the Carer Map and the Carer APP, which are
analogous to the Parent Map and Parenting APP described in the section on Reflective
Parenting earlier in this chapter. The Carer Map seeks to support the foster carer ’s
capacity for self-mentalizing, and the Carer APP aims to improve the foster carer ’s ability
to mentalize the child by elucidating a mentalizing stance characterized by attention and
curiosity, perspective taking, and providing empathy.
Each of the 10 sessions has a specific focus [ 19]:
1. introduction to the RFP
2. reflecting on yourself as a foster carer —the Carer Map
3. seeing and thinking about your foster child in different ways
4. understanding and helping your foster child who has experienced developmental or
other trauma
5. trust, relationships, and helping your foster child to get on better with other people
6. responding to problematic behavior in a reflective way
7. understanding misunderstandings —putting your Carer Map and APP together
8. getting the help and support you need as a foster carer —from family, friends, and the
team around you
9. moving on —getting ready for the end of the RFP
10. review and ending session —how to keep the model in mind and stay
feeling supported.
The sessions are delivered by pairs of trained fac ilitators (one registered social care worker
and one experienced foster carer), who are provided with a weekly consultation with
specialists at the Anna Freud Centre in London. The co-delivery approach can build compe-
tence and capability within the system, and it expands the holding of “expertise ”within the
system ’s network. After the program has ended, foster carers are provided with access to
materials about Reflective Fostering online, and are encouraged to form an online
support group.
At the time of writing, a definitive, superiority, two-armed, parallel, pragmatic,
randomized controlled trial, with embedded process evaluation and economic evalu-
ation, and an internal pilot, to evaluate the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of the
RFP, is being run in local authorities across England [ 19]; this follows on from two
development and preliminary projects [ 13,15,18], which showed high recruitment,
retention, relevance, and acceptability for foster carers, and improvements in foster
carers ’stress and carer-reported measures of foster children ’s mental health.
Minding the Baby
Minding the Baby (MTB) is a home-visiting program for vulnerable first-time mothers,
which aims to support these mothers in developing their reflective functioning skills in the
context of their relationship with their baby [ 20–22]. It begins toward the end of the second
trimester of pregnancy and continues until the baby is 2 years old. Mothers are visited weekly
through the pregnancy and after birth until the child is 1 year old, and once a fortnight for
the second year of infancy. The frequency of visits is also adjusted according to need, with
more frequent visits arranged at times of crisis. Although the mother and baby are the360 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 408 blihd li b C bid  i i 
primary focus of MTB, fathers are also encouraged to become involved, as are any other
important figures for the mother and child, such as siblings, grandparents, or close friends.
MTB focuses help on young mothers who are emotionally vulnerable and lack the
psychological resilience and support to deal with the considerable challenges of
parenting. The program operates in deprived areas, and the women who are recruited
to join the program are often struggling with the combined disadvantages of poverty,
social isolation, poor education, and complex mental health needs. Many of them have a
history of trauma, abuse, or neglect in their own childhood or adolescence.
MTB takes an interdisciplinary approach. The team is made up of a nurse and a social
worker who alternate visits and provide a range of help that is carefully tailored to match
each mother ’s needs. High levels of practical parenting support are an important part of
the work, and involve individual and family health assessments, as well as nutritional and
family planning advice. The provision of this intensive parenting support reflects the fact
that the women in the program are often under-supported and under-resourced in every
sense when it comes to the care of their child. The program also addresses physical safety
and access to necessities such as nappies and food. The nurse ’s role is focused on health
promotion and mental health screening. The social worker provides support with issues
that may arise in relation to housing, schooling, and navigating challenging social care
systems, as well as using psychotherapeutic approaches to support the mother ’s mental
health, family functioning, or issues relating to trauma [ 22]. To give parents the mental
space that they need to enable them to focus on their relationship with their baby, they
often require support in dealing with severe stressors that would otherwise get in the
way. Working with the mother to assist her in providing better care in this way also
strengthens the links between the mother and the team; building the relationship
between the mother and the MTB practitioners is crucial to the success of the program,
and the personalized nature of the help that is provided and the consistency of the
relationship with known and trusted practitioners all work toward this goal.
The emphasis on engagement and foster ing ongoing relationships with these
at-risk, first-time young mothers, as well as ensuring that the team has the professional
expertise appropriate to meeting the mothers ’complex health, social, and mental
health needs, builds trust and reduces dropout from the program. The integrative
model of MBT, which combines practical and mental health support, is considered to
be crucial for optimizing both parental and child outcomes across a range of domains.
In combining multimodal support to tackle social adversity with a close focus on the
mother –child relationship, particularly the sen sitivity of parental care and parental
reflective functioning, MTB aims to combine b est clinical practice in early prevention
with scientific evidence relating to the dev elopmental processes that promote optimal
child outcomes. A randomized controlle d trial of young mothers who took part in
MTB for 27 months (from pregnancy to the child ’s second birthday) found that the
women in the MTB group were more likely to show improved reflective functioning,
and their infants were signif icantly more likely to show secure attachment and less
likely to show disorganized attachment, compared with mother –child pairs who had
not participated in the program [ 22].
Concluding Remarks
The models of practice described in this chapter all show how mentalizing can be applied
in different settings, often in the community, and by a range of practitioners, such asMentalizing in Other Settings 361
h di 00 98088960 408 blihd li b C bid  i i 
social workers, experienced foster carers, and teachers —or, as is particularly the case
with AMBIT, the whole network around a client and the key helping figure whom the
client identifies as having the strongest relationship with them. All of these forms of
practice seek to build the capacity to mentalize within existing relationships and in
communities, without the application of a clinical MBT program for a particular mental
health disorder.
InChapter 2 we described the three communication systems that we have proposed
to underpin effective forms of psychotherapy. All of the forms of work described in this
chapter are particularly attentive to the third communication system —that is, applying
social learning in the wider environment . They are informed by the knowledge that
focusing on an individual ’s capacity to mentalize while failing to attend to the wider
social system around that person is less likely to result in meaningful help, particularly
for individuals with multiple or complex needs and/or those who would benefit from the
experience of a mentalizing community around them, in which it is possible to think
together in the “we-mode. ”Whether the work is with parents struggling to regulate and
manage family life, foster children and carers working to form and sustain a positive
caring relationship, a young socially vulnerable mother, a child in an intimidating school
environment, or an individual with complex and/or multiple needs, it is hoped that —by
providing a space for individuals to think together, to experience a “we-mode ”and
reduce isolation —it may become possible to improve social functioning and
connectedness.
References
1. Fonagy P, Campbell C, Constantinou M
et al. Culture and psychopathology: an
attempt at reconsidering the role of social
learning. Dev Psychopathol 2022; 34:
1205 –20.
2. Bevington D, Fuggle P, Cracknell L,
Fonagy P. Adaptive Mentalization-Based
Integrative Treatment: A Guide for Teams
to Develop Systems of Care . Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2017.
3. Twemlow SW, Fonagy P, Sacco FC.
A developmental approach to mentalizing
communities: I. A model for social
change. Bull Menninger Clin 2005; 69:
265–81.
4. Twemlow SW, Fonagy P, Sacco FC.
A developmental approach to mentalizing
communities: II. The Peaceful Schools
experiment. Bull Menninger Clin 2005;
69: 282 –304.
5. Simpson JA, Collins WA, Tran S, Haydon
KC. Attachment and the experience and
expression of emotions in romantic
relationships: a developmentalperspective. J Pers Soc Psychol 2007; 92:
355–67.
6. van Harmelen AL, Kievit RA, Ioannidis K
et al. Adolescent friendships predict later
resilient functioning across psychosocial
domains in a healthy community cohort.
Psychol Med 2017; 47: 2312 –22.
7. Cooper A, Redfern S. Reflective Parenting:
A Guide to Understanding What ’s Going
On in Your Child ’s Mind . Abingdon, UK:
Routledge, 2016.
8. Fonagy P, Steele H, Steele M. Maternal
representations of attachment during
pregnancy predict the organization of
infant-mother attachment at one year of
age.Child Dev 1991; 62: 891 –905.
9. Fonagy P, Steele M, Steele H et al. The
capacity for understanding mental states:
the reflective self in parent and child and
its significance for security of attachment.
Infant Ment Health J 1991; 12: 201 –18.
10. Taubner S, Horz S, Fischer-Kern M et al.
Internal structure of the Reflective
Functioning Scale. Psychol Assess 2013;
25: 127 –35.362 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 408 blihd li b C bid  i i 
11. Redfern S. Parenting and foster care. In:
Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds. Handbook of
Mentalizing in Mental Health Practice ,
2nd ed. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association Publishing, 2019;
265–79.
12. National Statistics. Children Looked After
in England Including Adoptions:
Reporting Year 2021 . 2022. https://
explore-education-statistics.service.gov
.uk/find-statistics/children-looked-after-
in-england-including-adoptions/2021 .
13. Redfern S, Wood S, Lassri D et al. The
Reflective Fostering Programme:
background and development of a new
approach. Adopt Foster 2018; 42: 234 –48.
14. National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence. Looked-After Children and
Young People . London, UK: National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence,
2013. www.nice.org.uk/guidance/qs31 .
15. Midgley N, Sprecher EA, Cirasola A et al.
The reflective fostering programme:
evaluating the intervention co-delivered
by social work professionals and foster
carers. J Child Serv 2021; 16: 159 –74.
16. Sempik J, Ward H, Darker I. Emotional
and behavioural difficulties of children
and young people at entry into care. Clin
Child Psychol Psychiatry 2008; 13: 221 –33.
17. Ensink K, Begin M, Normandin L,
Fonagy P. Parental reflective functioning
as a moderator of child internalizingdifficulties in the context of child sexual
abuse. Psychiatry Res 2017; 257:
361–6.
18. Midgley N, Cirasola A, Austerberry C
et al. Supporting foster carers to meet the
needs of looked after children: a feasibility
and pilot evaluation of the Reflective
Fostering Programme. Dev Child Welfare
2019; 1:4 1–60.
19. Midgley N, Irvine K, Rider B et al. The
Reflective Fostering Programme-
improving the wellbeing of children in
care through a group intervention for
foster carers: a randomised controlled
trial. Trials 2021; 22: 841.
20. Sadler LS, Slade A, Mayes LC. Minding
the Baby: a mentalization-based parenting
program. In: Allen JG, Fonagy P, eds. The
Handbook of Mentalization-Based
Treatment . Chichester, UK: John Wiley &
Sons, 2006; 271 –88.
21. Sadler LS, Slade A, Close N et al. Minding
the Baby: enhancing reflectiveness to
improve early health and relationship
outcomes in an interdisciplinary home
visiting program. Infant Ment Health J
2013; 34: 391 –405.
22. Slade A, Holland ML, Ordway MR et al.
Minding the Baby®: enhancing parental
reflective functioning and infant
attachment in an attachment-based,
interdisciplinary home visiting program.
Dev Psychopathol 2020; 32: 123 –37.Mentalizing in Other Settings 363
h di 00 98088960 408 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Part IV
Chapter
18Application of Mentalization-Based Treatment in
Different Populations and in Different Settings
Mentalizing and Emergency Care
Introduction
The risk of severe crises is high in individuals with personality disorders. In every
clinician ’s mind, their patient ’s suicidal risk requires constant monitoring. As we dis-
cussed in Chapter 4 , the mentalization-based treatment (MBT) program integrates risk
evaluation as a continuous assessment process that is linked to a carefully crafted and
personalized crisis plan for each patient. Notwithstanding these significant precautions,
patients may need to be hospitalized during treatment. On average, approximately 20%
of patients will be admitted for psychiatric hospitalization during treatment [ 1].
Therefore, for a significant proportion of patients who are being treated with a special-
ized therapy, psychiatric emergency care represents a key area of work in the patient ’s
treatment trajectory. In this chapter we shall describe how MBT can inform emergency
care when a crisis is handled by the multidisciplinary team of mental health practitioners
in psychiatric emergency settings. Indeed, an increasing number of psychiatric emer-
gency practitioners have engaged in specialized training in, for example, MBT, dialectical
behavior therapy (DBT), or other forms of specialized treatment for personality dis-
orders. This training provides clinical principles of intervention that are usually imple-
mented over a timescale of around 12 –18 months. However, hospital emergency care
practitioners and mental health crisis units intervene on a very different timescale,
usually a 1- to 3-day brief hospitalization format, with a mission to contain dangerous
behaviors related to the crisis, and to safely discharge the patient with a plan to reconnect
with their outpatient treatment plan, or to initiate outpatient treatment when the crisis
represents the entry point to treatment.
The clinical framework of MBT can significantly inform emergency hospital care
practice [ 2–4]. In order to specify how MBT can be employed in emergency care, the
notion of psychological crisis will be defined, and the key elements of crisis intervention
will be reviewed, bearing in mind the timescale over which crises unfold. This narrows
down the objectives of very short-term emergency care hospitalizations. Taking these
restrictions into account, a four-step model of MBT-informed emergency care has been
developed:
1. intake and admission into emergency care
2. uncovering the crisis
3. integration and formulation of the crisis area
4. preparation for discharge.
Throughout this chapter the model will be illustrated with a clinical example of an
emergency crisis.
364
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
What Is a Crisis?
The way that professionals define a crisis affects the way in which they engage with the
mental states of a patient who is presenting with acute emotional and behavioral
disturbances. It is important to first define the nature of a crisis, and then relate that
definition to mentalizing theory, in particular the concept of the alien self (see
Chapter 2 ). Building on this conceptual framework, it becomes clear that the patient ’s
sense of agency is at the center of recovery from a crisis episode. Furthermore, in the
context of psychiatric emergency care, which is provided in a hospital or crisis assess-
ment center setting, time is of the essence. In other words, there is a limitation on the
length of hospitalizations if these are required, and a specificity to clinical presentations
that are deemed appropriate for assessment in these contexts. In this discussion, patients
with personality disorders or first-time hospitalizations, who represent about 25% of all
psychiatric emergency hospitalizations, will be considered. For patients with personality
disorder who are experiencing a suicidal crisis, and probably for others, too, psychiatric
emergency care can be informed by mentalizing. Among these patients, approximately
20–30% will meet the criteria for borderline personality disorder (BPD). Psychological
work with these patients will build upon first defining and understanding the nature of
their crisis.
Crisis: A Working Definition
Patients may experience crises during treatment, but how are these defined and delin-
eated for an individual? James [ 5] offers a useful starting point for answering this
question: “an individual crisis is the perception or experiencing of the event by the
person as an intolerable difficulty that exceeds the individual ’s resources and coping
abilities. Unless the individual obtains some relief from the situation, the crisis has the
potential to create severe affective, behavioral, and cognitive malfunctioning to the point
of becoming life threatening or injurious to oneself or others ”(p. 387).
In keeping with the MBT approach, a crisis is defined first from the patient ’s perspec-
tive—it both overwhelms the individual ’s regulatory mechanisms and exceeds the
resources (notably at the individual, interpersonal, therapeutic, and social levels) available
to address acute dysregulation. Furthermore, a crisis has life-threatening potential. Crises
that entail hospitalization in psychiatric emergency care represent a kind of prototype of
how a crisis is represented from an MBT perspective. However, crises can unfold in the
absence of emergency hospitalizations, through a variety of episodes that involve acute
dysregulation leading to life-threatening behaviors. But a crisis is rooted in an individual ’s
experience —from the standpoint of MBT the patient ’s subjectivity directly connects with
how the self, others, and the world are combined in lived experience. As we have already
mentioned, the patient ’s perspective is a key area of inquiry for any MBT therapist who
wishes to foster epistemic trust (see Chapter 2 ).
A key element of the patient ’s experience is its unfolding, or temporality; in James ’s
definition [ 5], cited earlier, these can be unpacked from the warning issued: “Unless the
individual obtains some relief from the situation ....”The notion of relief as an end point
to a crisis trajectory stimulates several central questions relating to the key characteristics
of a crisis —not only the temporality of the crisis, but also the form of the crisis, the nature
of the crisis, and additional characteristics of the crisis such as its length and potential
lethality (see Table 18.1 ). All of these characteristics will contribute to evaluation of bothMentalizing and Emergency Care 365
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
the severity of the crisis and the nature of what may indeed relieve the patient from the
intolerable experience that acutely exceeds their resources and capacity to cope with it.
Emergency hospital care typically comes into play during the acute phase of the crisis,
which often takes the form of self-destructive behaviors such as suicidal ideation and/or
suicide attempts. The nature of the crisis may combine different levels of functioning,
from personal to social, yet it is often the case that from the subjective point of view of
patients, specific elements or triggers such as a sense of failure (personal), shame
(interpersonal), or exclusion (social) have contributed to making a difficult situation
unbearable to experience.
In this chapter, a prototypical patient, Jill, will be used to illustrate an emergency
crisis, showing how difficult situations can evolve into crisis-level episodes.
Clinical Example: Jill
Jill is describing an episode that led up to her suicide attempt by swallowing the contents
of a whole packet of paracetamol tablets:
“I had been feeling unloved by Jeremy, and I thought we would make our holiday a
moment to reconnect. I reserved an apartment in a resort. He spent the entire first two days
working, leaving me feeling unimportant to him, and I got very depressed. On the second
evening, I managed to prepare a special dinner, which he ate very quickly and barely said
thanks. Later on, when I asked him if we could talk, he said he had enough problems
already and was not interested in my ‘mood swings. ’I started crying, and cried for at least
an hour, non-stop. As I saw him going to bed, I told him, ‘Jeremy, I can ’t go on living like
this! ’and he answered that I could just go back to the city if I wasn ’t happy. I startedTable 18.1 Key characteristics that contribute to delineating the field of a crisis
Crisis characteristics Examples
Time point Pre-crisis Increased arousal, risk behaviors
Crisis Hospitalization, fugue
Post-crisis Reintegration into the household, therapy
Form Internalized/avoidance Isolation, disengagement, etc., leading to adverse
consequences
Externalized on self Suicide attempt, self-harm
Externalized on others Violent assault, verbal abuse
Nature Personal Personal failures, mistakes, fraud
Interpersonal Separation, conflict, loss
Loss of resources Loss of employment, household, social network
Other Duration Hours, days, or weeks of enduring crisis
Lethality Degree of threat to life
Threat Threats concerning life and death (of the self and/
or others), planning illegal activities, gambling366 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
screaming that I would kill myself and he replied ‘Honestly, I don ’t give a shit. ’I was
shocked. I vaguely remember heading to the bathroom, and eventually I swallowed all the
meds I could find .”
This example resonates with the description of psychological crises given by Nizum
et al. [ 6]:“Crises are subjective experiences that threaten and overwhelm a person ’s
ability to deal with the situation using their normal problem-solving abilities, coping
mechanisms, or current resources. ...The overwhelming experience can have detrimen-
tal effects on mental health, including intense feelings of personal distress, implications
on physical health, inability to meet basic needs, unusual behavior ”(p. 349). From an
MBT perspective, such intense subjective experiences have been characterized using the
term alien self (see Chapter 2 ), which, to paraphrase, consists of alienating self-
experiences that take hold of the patient ’s mind during a crisis. These experiences relate
to episodes in which the individual ’s self is under a type of threat that involves a
significant loss of personal agency —desperate and violent actions are engaged in an
attempt to regain agency in the face of such a threat. The alien self theory and how it
applies to emergency care will be discussed in the next section. For now, it is possible to
hypothesize that in the clinical example that has just been described, Jill alerted her
boyfriend to the intensity of her experience ( “I can ’t go on like this ”), which was met by
Jeremy ’s contingent but insensitively non-congruent mirroring response ( “go back to the
city if you are unhappy ”). The lack of emotional congruency arises from the mismatch
between the despair and fear expressed by Jill and Jeremy ’s mirroring back to her of her
emotions as being unjustifiable feelings of being unhappy and unsatisfied. This fails to
resonate with her emotional state and so is affectively disqualifying. This increases Jill ’s
arousal to a level of suicidal threat ( “I will kill myself ”), and Jeremy further mirrors to Jill
that she is not worth any attention even when she is in such a state. The ensuing
psychological shock transports Jill into a form of alienating self-experience in which,
paradoxically, overdosing on medication is perceived as the only viable option for
relieving the psychological pain that she is experiencing. The alienating self-experience
that we can imagine taking hold of Jill ’s mind may resemble a self-representation such as
“My life is not worthy of any attention .”The affective consequence here is such that it
threatens the integrity of Jill ’s sense of agency. In the face of such a threat, recourse to
violence and/or paradoxical action can kick in, because they represent the last resource
available to stop the pain, even if this leads to death.
Later on in her crisis episode, Jill was driven to a nearby psychiatric clinic where,
fortunately, emergency care was provided. Ideally, the staff in an emergency service should
embody a safe and trustworthy environment that can provide the appropriate care to allow
de-escalation of the crisis. Yet Johnson et al. note that a psychological crisis is a “challenge
for mental health services aiming to focus on supporting recovery, ”and they further
highlight the fact that “relapse after an acute crisis episode is common ”([7], p. 409).
The focus of interventions in emergency care can be summarized in terms of three
objectives [ 5]:
1. stabilization
2. reduction of the risk of possible escalation to suicide
3. prevention of repetition.Mentalizing and Emergency Care 367
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
These objectives entail a number of clinical challenges for the emergency team during
the period of assessment and hospitalization (which will be time-limited), and also
depend on their ability to connect with the patient ’s mental health network in the
community. Crisis work integrates de-escalating interventions with mentalizing work
to formulate the crisis episode and plan the necessary elements for securing the patient ’s
reintegration into their usual environment. Indeed it is known that discharge from
hospital has the potential to trigger discontinuation of care, which itself may lead to an
increased risk of suicide [ 8]. Recent research has investigated how to improve the
efficiency and outcomes of emergency hospitalization periods [ 8,9]. In MBT, the initial
focus is on how emergency care can be integrated with elements of the patient ’s ongoing
psychotherapy, especially the formulation process around crises that occur during
treatment (see Chapter 4 ).
In summary, a mental health crisis is defined as the subjective experience of an
intolerable state (alienating self-experience), which typically takes hold of the patient ’s
mind following an event or situation that exceeds their resources and impairs their
coping skills and autonomy, to the extent that they need external help to recover safe
functioning and avoid a damaging and possibly lethal escalation. Psychologically speak-
ing, a crisis entails a central alienating self-experience (or a set of such experiences) tied
to potentially lethal teleological solutions. In the next section we shall describe in some
detail the theoretical basis of the clinical model of MBT during emergency care.
When the Alien Self Rears Its Ugly Head
In this section the psychological parameters underlying the concept of the alien self
proposed by Peter Fonagy and his colleagues [ 10] (see also Chapter 2 ) are discussed
within a framework of alienating self-experiences . These experiences are key to under-
standing MBT ’s clinical approach in psychiatric emergency care. The fundamental
question when dealing with suicidality is how an individual ’s mind can be co-opted to
unite the means of, and proceed with the attempt at, eliminating itself.
In suicidal states, the individual experiences the “I”as the source of intolerable
suffering (see Chapter 6 ). This can take a variety of forms: “I am bad ,”“I am disgusting ,”
“I am worthless ,”“I am not worthy of love ,”“I am sick ,”“I am void ,”“I am meaningless ,”
and so on. As long as these ways of perceiving oneself can be partially mentalized as “me”
representations and not the whole of “I”experience (i.e., only a part of me is “bad,”
“disgusting, ”or“worthless ”), partial mentalizing usually prevents recourse to action to
harm or eliminate oneself. However, when mental states collapse into psychic
equivalence and take over the momentary “I”experience of oneself, then representations
such as “nobody loves me ”become strong, and rigid feelings of “I am unlovable ”
dominate the “I”experience, hijacking the “me”representational space. In such
instances, the psychic pain is fully embodied and threatens the agency of the self, because
it is nothing other than “bad,”“unlovable, ”and so on. Recourse to self-harm and suicidal
actions represents the self ’s last recourse to agency —self-directed aggression [ 11].
Aggression is then used against the self to try to eliminate the pain that is robbing the
person of agency. This is possible only because the human mind has the capacity to
“objectify ”itself —a capacity that seems to step in during crises, fueled by a wish to
survive and overcome the mental pain, and indeed to regain agency. This can lead the
individual to assemble the necessary means of eliminating the alienating self-experience,368 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
possibly at the cost of their life. Most often, when a suicide attempt does not result in
death, the individual is relieved that this battle with the alienating self-experience, which
is now contained in a “me”representation ( “part of me wanted out so badly! ”) did not
succeed in eliminating the self. This suggests that in the great majority of cases, the
alienating self-experience is momentary, and is then reintegrated into a more complex
experience of the self that integrates the multiplicity of “me”representations that make
up our self-models.
How can we link this back to mentalizing? Peter Fonagy and his colleagues have
outlined a developmental model that links the alien self to poorly mirrored interactions
during early childhood [ 10,12]. Of course, poor parental mirroring is not the only trigger
of alienating self-experiences. Indeed, all situations that cause individuals to experience
themselves as having no agency carry the potential for alienation; these situations range
from abusive experiences to physical illness, through catastrophic interpersonal events
(e.g., infidelity), social phenomena (e.g., being caught in a dangerously swarming crowd),
or environmental events (e.g., facing a tsunami). Similarly to early clinical insights [ 13],
we believe that the nature of trauma lies in its alienating potential —its capacity to cause a
powerful loss of agency, subjecting the individual to a degree of helplessness that
threatens their integrity (see Chapter 11 ).
Coming back to mentalizing theory, the marked mirroring response of the parent is a
rich and useful model for illustrating the dynamics of agency and alienation [ 10]. Poor
mirroring will induce an alienating subjective experience because of its effect on agency;
in fact, the experience of alienation can be conceptualized as being on the opposite pole
of the continuum that it forms with agency. In MBT terms, we conceive of an agency –
alienation continuum translating this key feature of subjective experience, and link it to
how mirroring can foster or deplete individual agency, depending on the degree of
sensitivity of the caregiver ’s mirroring response (see Figure 18.1 ).
The three main characteristics of affective mirroring by the caregiver —contingency,
congruency, and markedness —all contribute to activating the sense of agency in the child
[14]. Although affective mirroring plays a central role in the development of the self, recent
work by Fotopoulou and Tsakiris has led to increased interest in the centrality of embodied
experience in the constitution of the self [ 15]. Neuroscientific evidence provides support for
AGENCY ALIENATION
Sensitive affective mirroring
A contingent response generates in the baby a
sense of “having an effect” on the caregiver
(based in teleology)
A congruent response generates a sense of 
“feeling together”—a similar emotion, a base for
belongingness
A marked response generates in the baby a
sense of recognition and legitimacy of being a
worthy social agent in the mind of the caregiverInsensitive affective mirroring
A non-contingent response generates a sense of
“having no effect” on the caregiver, generating panic
and intensifying dysregulated affective arousal
An incongruent response generates a sense o f
being “alien,” “too different,” or “not right,” which can
lead to solitude, or to over-adaptation (“false self”)
A lack of marking generates a sense that one’s
affect is dangerously contagious and threatens the
stability and availability of the caregiver 
Fig. 18.1 The agency –alienation continuum.Mentalizing and Emergency Care 369
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
the view that skin-to-skin and body-to-body contact in the attachment relationship with
infants strengthens their early self-regulation capacities by fostering multisensory integra-
tion. Furthermore, mentalizing is first and foremost communicated through holding,
handling, and presenting, as anticipated by D. W. Winnicott (as discussed by Fonagy and
Campbell [ 16]). In other words, the vehicle for the transmission of affective mirroring is
initially the parent ’s body and their way of physically attending to the infant ’sn e e d s .
According to this developmental perspective, teleology is not so much a “non-mentalizing ”
mode as a foundation of mentalized interactions. In fact, the developmental theory of
mentalizing suggests that pre-mentalizing modes constitute building blocks of the fully
matured capacity for mentalizing. This is relevant because both early attachment and
emergency care environments are settings that operate in a way that is based on teleology —
the baby ’s brain is mainly wired to apprehend reality on the basis of perception, and
similarly, a patient in an acute crisis is very much engaged in “perception-as-proof ”mode,
not to mention the hospital environment, which largely functions in terms of “doing mode, ”
simply because life-and-death matters require action . Therefore both the mentalizing parent
and the mentalizing mental health professional will find it useful to keep in mind that neither
the baby, nor the patient, nor the hospital will suddenly be transformed into a sophisticated
mentalizing agent. However, injecting mentalizing into such contexts represents an invest-
ment in mid- to long-term outcomes, both for the staff and for the patient and their family.
The key task for the parent and the mental health professional alike is to meet the needs of
the vulnerable individual (the infant or patient) through empathic validation of the recourse
to action (for a description of working with teleological mode, see Chapter 4 ), while keeping
their own mentalizing online. This starting point is essential for MBT work, which seeks to
build or increase the mentalizing process from “ground zero, ”where it shut down. The
principle can be encapsulated in four steps, which are necessary to enable the patient to
pursue their life following hospitalization:
1. Clinically assist in de-escalating the crisis.
2. Prevent worsening of suicidality.
3. Block relapses of suicidal behavior.
4. Build a mentalizing narrative of the crisis.
It may be useful to note that alienating self-experiences have an additional adverse
effect —they disconnect the individual from the idea that others can help them.
Momentarily, others cease to exist as potential resources that can provide help and support.
When the patient makes their way to emergency psychiatric care, the relational rupture
effect of alienating self-experiences is often still active. This suggests that the first step for
mental health professionals is to engage with the patient on a human level, in order to
reopen a place in the patient ’s mind where they can feel that others represent a resource for
them, both in the present moment and in the future. This links to MBT ’sc l i n i c a la p p r o a c h ,
and especially to epistemic trust as a gateway to building a mentalizing process. We shall
now focus on the application of the MBT approach to the context of emergency care.
Clinical Approach: From Epistemic Trust to
Mentalizing the Crisis
Engaging with the patient in emergency care represents the first and perhaps most
important area for successful emergency care. Indications for short psychiatric370 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
hospitalization emergency programs can be informed by MBT. The rest of this chapter
will provide an outline of the criteria for emergency psychiatric intervention, followed by
a summary of the clinical steps necessary to build a mentalizing process to inform the
formulation of the crisis and post-discharge prevention and treatment plan. Finally, each
element of the four-step model (see this chapter: Introduction) will be described, and will
be illustrated using the clinical example of Jill ’s hospitalization.
Approximately 70% of psychiatric emergency consultations represent the first con-
tact an individual has with the mental healthcare system [ 17]. Suicidal behavior, self-
injury, and internalizing symptoms of anxiety and depression are the most common
reasons for contact with psychiatric emergency services [ 18]. Criteria for admission for
brief inpatient care can vary between different hospitals. Box 18.1 lists the most common
criteria for admission for MBT-informed emergency care.
In terms of the stages of a crisis, it is helpful to visualize an overall sequence of an unfolding
crisis intervention in emergency psychiatr y. The evaluation and admission for emergency
hospitalization usually take place during the first stage of the crisis (see Figure 18.2 ). The
evaluation is handled by the emergency war d staff, who evaluate and triage the patient.
Elements of the context in which the crisis arose begin to emerge from the referring
clinician ’s discussions with the emergency ward staff and from the first contact with theBox 18.1 Admission or referral criteria for MBT-informed emergency care.
Criteria for Admission
/C15Patient in crisis, suicidal threats, or self-harm requiring immediate care.
/C15First contact with the psychiatric system and requiring hospital care.
/C15Any patient presenting an indication for a crisis intervention, which is brief and
sustained, cannot be carried out on an outpatient basis, and may avoid a longer
hospital stay.
/C15By extension, the presence of suicidal ideation or a suicide attempt, acute anxious-
depressive symptomatology, severe adjustment disorders, or borderline
personality disorder.
/C15No immediate medico-surgical needs.
Criteria for Other Types of Psychiatric Care
Strong Criteria
/C15Somatic comorbidity requiring treatment not offered in emergency psychiatric unit.
/C15Psychotic breakdown.
/C15Mania or hypomania.
/C15Psychomotor agitation or violence.
/C15Drug addiction with focus on treatment for withdrawal and rehabilitation.
Relative Criteria
/C15Patients in late adolescence *
/C15Patients with decompensating mental disorder requiring hospitalization for more than
7 days (e.g., severe depression).
* Note that patients between 16 and 18 years of age can be hospitalized if the unit can provide the
necessary setting (individual room, competences in adolescent psychiatry, etc.).Mentalizing and Emergency Care 371
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
patient. Like any storyline that is shared in a real-life setting, the elements that emerge
typically lack narrative structure, and they do not necessarily respect the sequence of
events or the order of importance with regard to the triggers and key alienating self-states
that led to the hospitalization. These will be uncovered gradually as the patient and the
staff gather the relevant information about the crisis episode and its context. The patient
and staff will work through these elements to co-create a crisis narrative, with the
intention of working out how a teleological solution (in Jill ’s case, taking a whole packet
of paracetamol tablets) came to be seen as the only possible way to handle psychological
suffering at the culmination of the crisis. Working around the narrative before, during,
and after the crisis, as well as imagining what could have been done differently, and what
will be done the next time similar factors converge to create difficult mental states in the
patient, will provide the necessary elements to begin to develop a post-hospitalization
crisis and treatment plan, and to work on the contextual elements accompanying the
patient ’s discharge from the hospital and safe return home.
Summary
Mentalizing can be particularly helpful to clinicians working in emergency care where
first-time hospitalizations and hospitalizations related to personality disorders are
treated separately from the other, “revolving-door ”-type emergency consultations, which
often imply substance dependence, bipolar disorders, or psychotic disorders. In a service
that is dedicated to first-time users and users with personality disorders, approximately
20–30% of cases will be related to a diagnosis of BPD or other personality disorders.
Importantly, for many individuals this will be the entry point to mental health treatment
[3]. The MBT framework is well suited to the heterogeneity of the clinical presentations
of patients with suicidal risk and behaviors. Broadly speaking, mental health
professionals trained in MBT will be equipped with the skills to:
1. engage with the patient
2. develop a shared understanding of the problemOutpatient care
Inpatient careMentalizing
Pre-crisis CrisisIntake Working through DischargeTrigger(s)
Arousal (inverse)Day 1* Days 2–5 Days 3–7
* Days are indicated as approximate time intervals, which can vary between services.
Fig. 18.2 Overview of emergency hospitalization from admission to discharge.372 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
3. co-create a crisis formulation, together with a prevention and treatment plan
4. prepare the patient for discharge.
The benefits of such an emergency intervention lie in directing the patient toward the
most appropriate treatment, reactivating the resources that could provide help within the
network around the patient, and reducing the risk of a relapse into suicidality.
The Four Steps of MBT-Informed Emergency Care
In this section we shall outline the four interdependent steps for delivering MBT-
informed psychological care in the context of short-term psychiatric emergency hospi-
talizations. We shall follow the timeline of a typical hospitalization, describing several
principles for each step, and illustrating them by referring to the clinical example of Jill ’s
presentation to services. In many services, “hospitalization ”is in fact now provided in the
community by intensive support from a crisis service. Therefore, although “brief hospi-
talization ”is outlined here, it is possible for the whole process to take place within a safe
community setting if crisis support and 24-hour team intervention are available.
Intake and Admission into Emergency Care
The intake process consists of three stages:
1. receiving the request for hospitalization
2. the initial meeting with the patient
3. the team debriefing after the patient ’s admission.
Receiving the Request for Hospitalization
A request for hospitalization commonly follows an assessment by general medical or
nursing staff who may themselves have become anxious about the patient ’s level of risk.
Their evaluation determines whether the crisis level meets the criteria for hospitalization
for a longer evaluation. The purpose of this initial contact is to reach an initial formulation
of the patient ’s problem as requiring hospitalization, and to foster enough agency to
allow every individual involved in the request for hospitalization, including the patient
and their family members and/or significant others, to be explicit about the kind of care
they are seeking for the problem that requires inpatient emergency care. In essence, the
idea is to jointly formulate a therapeutic plan that fits with the role of the crisis team and
the patient ’s needs. This usually takes a simpler form than a clinical case formulation, and
is formulated as a consensus statement: “What we will be treating during hospitalization
or work with the crisis team, and why .”This therapeutic plan is usually written down and
shared with all of the staff who are involved with the patient ’sc a r e .
We shall now give some examples of open-ended questions that will help everyone to
gather the information needed to formulate the consensus statement. These questions
are designed to help the referring psychiatrist, the patient, and the family members to
begin to focus on affects and representations of self and others, as well as the actual
teleological/factual elements of the situation.
/C15In your current understanding, how has the situation become unbearable?
/C15In your/the patient ’s mind, what do you think is different from other situations that
is now precipitating the need for hospitalization?
/C15What do you think you/the patient expect from the hospitalization?Mentalizing and Emergency Care 373
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
/C15Do you have the same expectations as the patient?
/C15What information has the patient communicated to their relatives about the
situation?
/C15Are there any current difficulties being experienced with the medical and
nursing staff?
At this stage, teleology is often entrenched: “She needs hospitalization because she has
attempted to kill herself! ”While validating the need for a teleological solution to provide
safety and de-escalation of the crisis, the mental health professionals informed by MBT
also try to orient thinking around affect and representations of self and others, which
may reveal information about the nature of alienating self-experiences and interpersonal
triggers involved in the crisis: “Yes, I understand she tried to kill herself and we will try to
better understand what happened. I was asking whether you had any sense of how she is
feeling about herself, and what she might seek in terms of help from us? ”
Clinical Example: Jill ’s Admission
As Jill left the living room after Jeremy told her he “didn ’t give a shit ”about her suicide
threat, he went to the bedroom to fetch his mobile phone and call her mother: “Hello?
Yeah, this is Jeremy, I think your daughter ’s gonna do something stupid again, and this time
don ’t count on me .”Jill’s mother immediately called her daughter, who fortunately
answered her mobile: “Mum, I ’ve just swallowed a box of paracetamol, I ’m feeling dizzy
and ...I’m scared .”Jill’s mother, who lived 15 miles away from the holiday resort, decided
to check up on her daughter, as she was unsure about the severity of the situation; Jill was
consistently portrayed by the family as vulnerable and needy. When Jill ’s mother arrived,
she found her daughter semi-conscious on the ground outside the apartment, alone. She
drove Jill to the nearest hospital emergency department.
During the intake process, the evaluating team took the time to medically assess the
situation to ensure safety with regard to the dose of paracetamol that Jill had taken.
Fortunately, she was out of harm ’s way, medically speaking. Jill had consulted the same
psychiatric emergency team about 4 months previously, accompanied by Jeremy and her
mother, following a self-harm episode in which she had superficially slashed her wrists
after an argument. She was discharged the same day, and contact between her and the
hospital ’s psychotherapy outpatient service was facilitated, but she had attended only a
few sessions.
Upon evaluation, the emergency team thought that this time Jill met the criteria for
hospitalization. The meeting with the emergency team is briefly illustrated by the
following excerpts.
Clinical Example: Questions from the Emergency Team
Question: In your current understanding, how has the situation become unbearable?
PSYCHIATRIST :She’s gone from self-harm to suicide attempt in a few months, there is an escalation of
risk that needs a proper evaluation.
MOTHER :Her boyfriend, he is even more of an [expletive] than I thought. This has to stop.374 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Question: What does the patient expect from the hospitalization?
PSYCHIATRIST :I think she hopes the boyfriend will come and see her to mend things. Hopefully you
[the emergency team] will get her to stick to therapy; she ’s on a slippery slope.
MOTHER :Her therapist was useless, obviously. I have borderline personality disorder myself, I know
what it ’s like. My daughter needs to figure out how toxic he is, this guy is ruining her life.
Question: Are there any current difficulties being experienced with the medical and
nursing staff?
PSYCHIATRIST :It is like she ’s not really there, I don ’t know what you ’ll be able to get out of her, it feels
like she is “saying yes ”to please but that she wants to see this relationship through no matter
what the cost, which is a cause of worry for us.
MOTHER :I’m happy they decided on hospitalization this time ...They should have done so last
time around.
It is clear that the questions do not always get straight, informative answers, but the answers
do give an idea of the kind of low-mentalizing modes that are operating, as well as glimpses of
possible mentalizing. Follow-up questions wil l be necessary to assess how much mentalizing
can already assist in identifying affects and representations involved in a crisis. We can see how
the teleological mode structures everyone ’s thinking, along with some powerful psychic
equivalence blended with some possibly attune d mentalizing. In this situation, there is in
addition a sense of the dependency and volatili ty of the patient, indicated both by her mother ’s
answers and by those of the psychiatrist. The m other appears to be an ally who senses that
her daughter is caught in a difficult romantic relationship. The mother ’s own experience
can represent both a resource and an obstacle for everyone ’s mentalizing, and her need to
affirm her own experience may sometimes get in the way of mentalizing her daughter.
On the basis of these exchanges, an initial formulation of a consensus statement and
therapeutic plan was sketched around the idea of helping Jill to lower the intensity of her
thoughts about not being able to be a lovable girlfriend to Jeremy, which seem to trigger
strong feelings that compel her to harm herself, although in her mind this is not
intentional as she is trying to escape from mental pain. She also talks about a sense of
losing control at one point, which needs further understanding if a cycle of repeated
episodes of harming herself is to be disrupted. There needs to be discussion with Jill and
her mother about the advantages and disadvantages of involving Jeremy in this process,
as well as perhaps other significant interpersonal supports.
Jill ’s First Meeting and the Emergency Team ’s Admission Debrief
Following an induction to explain how the ward functions, and agreement on a safety
plan (e.g., surrendering any medication that could be used for a further overdose), an
initial meeting is scheduled involving Jill and two keyworkers. The purpose of this
meeting is to engage with Jill and begin to explore the crisis episode. One way to orient
the staff during this interview is to roughly follow five themes of interviewing:
1. introductions
2. exploration of the crisis
3. contextualizingMentalizing and Emergency Care 375
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
4. in-session experience
5. planning the hospital stay and two-level contract.
Introductions
The staff members present themselves, using a typically warm and humanistic approach
while maintaining a professional role, and they ask the patient to briefly present them-
selves, while attentively maintaining a balance between the staff and patient presentations.
T h ei d e ai st o “break the ice ”and explain the context for this first meeting. With the aim of
transparency, the staff will share all of the patient information that was sent through from
the emergency department to the team, so that the patient can begin to perceive the nature
of explicit communication and be encouraged to take the opportunity to correct any of the
information that has been received. Furthermore, the “not-knowing ”stance is used right
from the start to model interest in mental states as the staff divulge what they have
understood and what they are trying to further understand, using language tailored to
the patient ’s mentalizing capacities. The patient might correct or add information, which
provides an opportunity for the staff members to demonstrate that they will take this into
account and further mark their interest in the patient ’s point of view. The agenda for the
meeting is agreed upon, especially that the crisis will be explored at a pace that is acceptable
to the patient, and the patient is encouraged to alert the staff if they feel that the interview is
going too fast or does not feel right for them. The beginning of the exploration of the crisis
is sensitively marked. Importantly, the staff members ’overall attitude seeks to foster
agency in the patient. It is important to relate to the patient as an individual who wishes
to engage with the service to find the help that they feel they need. It needs to be clear in the
minds of both the staff and the patient that this is not a long-term therapeutic relationship,
nor is it a magical short-term intervention that will “solve ”everything. It is more of a
starting point to the patient being accompanied through a therapeutic journey with the
aim of enhancing their capacity to manage their own thoughts and emotions and to be able
to engage in relationships while preventing risky behaviors.
Exploration of the Crisis
The exploration of the crisis typically takes the form of a mentalizing functional analysis
(see Chapter 4 ) in which information on the narrative of the crisis is obtained,
attempting to get a sense of the affective narrative, the mental states involved, and the
attachment triggers that may have primed themes such as loss, rupture, shame, rejection,
and so on. Self and other representations along the narrative can be sensitively prompted
without going into a full not-knowing mode. Careful observation of changes in arousal
and/or possible dissociative phenomena will guide the clinician ’s investigation of the
crisis. Under- or over-empathizing with the patient at this stage will increase their
vigilance or credulity, respectively. The epistemic trust that is generated through the
clinician ’s humane interest can only be activated if the patient feels that they are an object
of respect, with their own experience as an area of joint attention. Interventions in the
“mentalizing process ”domain, such as contrary moves, clarification, reformulation, and
brief summaries, as well as empathic validation, are typically used by MBT-informed
clinicians (see Chapter 4 ).
At this stage, similar questions to those formulated with the referring psychiatrist
may be asked.376 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Clinical Example: Exploration of the Crisis
Question: In your current understanding, how has the situation become unbearable?
JILL:It seems I can never please my boyfriend, I don ’t know, I just lost it when he said he doesn ’t
care, I need him, I can ’t live without him!
Question :What do you expect from the hospitalization?
JILL:I want to show my boyfriend I ’m not crazy, I can do better this time. I ’m scared I won ’t
succeed ...Why doesn ’t he love me?
Question :Are there any current difficulties being experienced with the medical and
nursing staff?
JILL:No, thank you, people here have been really nice. I don ’t know if they can help, they must think
I’m just looking for attention.
Contextualizing
As the session continues, the staff usually move in and out of the crisis exploration,
notably because contextual and biographical information about current and past signifi-
cant relationships, their history, and other factors assist in going beyond a superficial
comprehension of the current situation. Much like the case formulation procedure
(described in Chapter 4 ), the staff will prompt the patient for information on their
relationship patterns, and will try to assess the interpersonal landscape that inevitably
includes factors relating to both risk and resilience. The assessment of mentalizing
function in the patient continues during this phase with regard to their capacity to
formulate a narrative, to structure timelines, and to identify mental state and emotions in
both the past and the present, as well as areas of low-mentalizing functioning.
In-Session Experience
In-session experience is the object of observation for everyone involved in the session.
What types of feelings and thoughts are provoked in the staff during the session? What
kinds of emotions, changes in arousal, experiences of feeling recognized, or experiences
of feeling discounted seem to be apparent in the patient? In getting to know the patient ’s
arousal and mentalizing systems, the staff try to pay attention to the patient ’s reactions to
their interventions and to how their stated intentions are received by the patient. On
many occasions, although the intentions of the staff are to try to better understand the
patient ’s affect in order to help the patient to regulate it, during this process the patient
may feel judged, misunderstood, or discounted. Conversely, the patient may feel that one
of the staff members understands “exactly ”what they are going through, or a staff
member might feel that they have a particularly good understanding of the situation
because of who they are or because of how the patient relates to them specifically. Any
increase in certainty such as this is a marker of decreased mentalizing. All of these
elements require careful attention, as they may alter the quality of mentalizing in
communication with the patient as well as between staff members.
In the first session, the clinical staff dynamically maintain the balance between
helping the patient to feel accepted for who they are and what they are going through,
and seeking to understand the mental states involved in the crisis. Keeping the interven-
tions around the structure, not-knowing stance, and process domains while sensitivelyMentalizing and Emergency Care 377
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
attending to the patient ’s low-mentalizing modes is key. Although the affective narrative
and relational mentalizing can be present, they occupy less space within the session. For
example, “soundbites ”of relational mentalizing may be useful for navigating through
moments of the session without getting into an extensive relational mentalizing inter-
vention. Again, the clinicians strive to work toward an acknowledgment of the patient ’s
experience in order to ignite a spark of epistemic trust, however small it may be.
Case Example: Excerpt from the First Meeting between Jill and the Staff
During the first meeting, Jill appears to engage with the staff only briefly, and repeatedly
switches between talking about what she should do (call Jeremy or send him a text
message) and her mother ’s incomprehension of her life. She is not responsive to the initial
validation attempts in relation to these two topics, and the psychiatric nurse increasingly
feels that it is as if Jill is having a conversation with herself.
NURSE:Jill, may I just interrupt you for a minute?
JILL:Euh ...yes, of course!
NURSE:I can hear that you are preoccupied with what to do with Jeremy now —to call, to text, or to
wait, right?
JILL:Yeah.
NURSE:...and that you are also feeling like your mum is not understanding the current situation ...
JILL:...and my whole life for that matter ( preparing to continue speaking on this topic )
NURSE:Right, just a minute! Before you continue I want you to know that I am getting that this is
what is in your thoughts at the moment. Can I just ask —how can wehelp?
JILL:Well, you could tell me what to do. Should I call Jeremy?
NURSE:Can we leave that for later in your hospital stay?
JILL:I need to know if he still loves me!
NURSE:I am hearing you, indeed it sounds like that is the emergency for you!
JILL:Yes!
NURSE:As you are saying this, Jill, are you feeling that your life depends on it?
JILL:YES!
NURSE:OK, we are hearing you, and we can imagine that being here without knowing where he
stands is leaving you with doubts that seem really unbearable for you.
In this example, the soundbite of relational mentalizing ( “How can wehelp? ”)
realigned the therapeutic exchange, and led to an additional empathic validation that
could be somewhat better contextualized from the patient ’s perspective. In the aftermath
of the first meeting, the clinical staff will keep an eye on how the patient actually engages
with thinking about the crisis rather than thinking of immediate solutions. Indeed, as the
environment around the patient will typically involve a reduction in their usual social,
family, and other triggers, the patient ’s mind will engage more in thinking about the378 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
current situation, where they are, and the degree of severity of the crisis episode —all of
which can create emotional turmoil that requires some support as the patient starts the
hospitalization period.
Planning the Hospital Stay and Two-Level Contract
Toward the end of the initial session, structural and psychoeducational elements are
introduced for the patient to continue developing a representation of the hospitalization.
Among the psychoeducational elements, attention can be drawn to the variation in the
degree to which self-experience is bearable, in relation to life before the crisis, within the
crisis episode, and during the hospital stay. Psychoeducation about the identification of
triggers and episodes that can switch self-experience from bearable to increasingly
unbearable helps to educate the patient about their vulnerabilities to different self-
experiences, and to increase their awareness of how self-harming mental states can come
to take up the whole of their mental space. This brings us back to the relationship
between mentalizing and affective arousal, and specifically how intense affect will reduce
an individual ’s capacity to use a variety of ways to cope with a given situation. The more
intense the affect becomes, the fewer the options that are available, and the greater the
risk that self-harm will come to seem like the only available option for dealing with the
unbearable feelings.
At this stage, the patient will find it useful to have a more concrete sense of what any
hospital stay will actually involve. A two-level contract is introduced —one level is valid
for the next 24 hours, and the second level relates to the remainder of the stay. The idea is
that the patient will engage themselves in working for at least 24 hours on reducing the
level of affect that led to the crisis episode. Once the intensity of affect has been lowered,
thinking about the rest of the stay becomes more feasible. This way of working helps the
patient —during the first 24 hours —to notice any changes in mental-state function and
the opening up of the possibility of mentalizing during periods when affect is less
intense. As a rule of thumb, the first 24 hours are devoted to settling into the unit (room
and facilities), to thinking of activities that might assist in reducing the affect, to planning
to contact the people who need to know where the patient is currently, and to prospect-
ively imagining how the patient is going to actively involve themself in the treatment —a
task that involves both the treatment team and the patient.
Post Meeting and Transmission of Information within the Unit
After admission to the unit and the first session, the information gathered needs to be
collated and transmitted to the team. Of particular interest is the integration of the
different points of view and counter-relationship experiences of the different members
of staff who have interacted with the patient —they all represent sources of information
about the patient and the nature of the crisis. The structure of team functioning allows
time to create a provisional common understanding of what the patient is presenting in
terms of unbearable mental states and to map out the areas that require further investi-
gation and what kinds of affects may, for team members, facilitate or impede the work
with the patient. It also facilitates a common understanding of what has been agreed
upon in terms of activities during the time at the unit, and the people who will be
informed about the patient ’s hospitalization. The patient ’s use of their mobile phone and
communication with attachment figures and other people outside the unit requires
planning and agreement. As we have highlighted in earlier chapters of this book,Mentalizing and Emergency Care 379
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
attachment stress challenges mentalizing, and when the patient is in a vulnerable state
this can quickly trigger a worsening of their condition. This means that reducing contact
with attachment figures for a short time might be beneficial.
Uncovering the Crisis
Following the first step of the hospitalization, the second step consists of working
through the psychological complexity of the crisis to co-create with the patient a working
hypothesis of how the crisis came about. This usually takes place from the second or
third day to the fourth or fifth day of hospitalization (or work with the crisis team if the
process is being completed in a community setting), and it involves four to six sessions,
each lasting 45 minutes. As the sessions follow one another, there is a progression,
guided by the clinicians, from consideration of external trigger factors to consideration
of internal affective-representational factors. The clinicians seek to gather the most
pertinent information that will constitute the building blocks for the upcoming third
step—the formulation. Therefore these sessions are still very much in mentalizing
process mode, to give everyone an opportunity to assess as accurately as possible the
emotional and relational landscapes that increase the risk of alienating self-states taking
over the patient ’s mind and leading to serious self-harm.
The staff will take the time to make explicit that the brief and focused hospitalization
period is entering this phase, usually when they review the 24-hour contract. The
purpose of this phase is to extend the investigation from the actual crisis to the following
seven contextual domains:
1. obtaining a reliable developmental timeline of the patient, noting all of the risk
factors along the way, the patient ’s previous contact(s) with mental health services, if
any, and investigating previous crises and how they were resolved
2. obtaining a satisfactory description of the history of the patient ’s key relationships,
and, more specifically, their more recent evolution and the possible challenges and
conflicts encountered
3. obtaining a good representation of role functioning for the patient, specifically
professionally (or in terms of training/education, if appropriate to the patient)
4. investigating the affective domain of functioning in close relationships in order to
assess satisfaction and possible concerns (this can include the sexual life of the
patient)
5. prompting and looking for areas of creativity, as well as strengths and domains that
contribute as protective factors
6. charting the resources available to the patient (e.g., personal, interpersonal, social,
community)
7. throughout the process, collecting information to establish a profile of the
mentalizing capacities of the patient.
The clinical techniques employed during the sessions are in keeping with the domains
of intervention of MBT —mentalizing process, managing ineffective mentalizing modes,
exploration of affective narrative, and relational mentalizing (see Chapter 4 )—and the
patient will have been informed that these domains will be considered systematically
during the sessions. The clinician therefore orients the sessions in a semi-structured
fashion, maintaining a balance between guided exploration and letting the patient “think380 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
out loud. ”The aim is to maintain the level of arousal in the sessions at an optimal degree of
activation to foster some segments of the patient ’s mentalizing while keeping the clinicians ’
mentalizing online. The clinicians employ the context domains template, summarized in
the 7-point list of contextual domains, to update the work done after each session and to
plan further investigation of areas that require this.
The main goal of this phase, which is made explicit to the patient, is to build a
working hypothesis of the crisis that links both external and internal factors to alienating
self-experiences that trigger self-harming behavior. In this sense, there is a clear psycho-
educational component that guides the support provided to the patient in making their
formulation about the crisis. As we mentioned earlier, the clinical staff will make it a
priority to enable agency in the patient, and sometimes this can conflict with the staff
wanting to provide support and relief to the patient who is experiencing difficult
emotions. However, as this work is very short term, it is of key importance that the
clinicians work with affect, but maintain a balance between affect identification and
elaboration, and activation of the patient ’s coping resources.
From a systemic point of view, the patient ’s crisis is embedded in a network of
relationships (a system) in which they tend to bear the responsibility for problems or
dysfunctions. Yet, as they are working on understanding the crisis, they are offered an
opportunity to appreciate the overall picture and the scope of the problem(s) within their
relational system. This perspective is fundamental to reappraising the situation as a
system in which everyone involved contributes to engaging in helpful and regulating
interactions, or in unhelpful and coercive interactions where roles and responsibilities
become confused and trigger attempts to regain domination or control. The staff may
find it useful to employ tools to map out the interpersonal and social network surround-
ing the patient —for example, by drawing concentric circles on a piece of paper, placing
the patient at the center (by writing their name inside the innermost circle), and asking
them to plot their family members and friends according to their level of emotional
closeness or distance. The different types of support that may be available to the patient
can then be charted, as well as the gaps that need to be filled in order to promote
salutogenic (health-promoting and health-sustaining) relational dynamics.
One aspect that has not yet been mentioned in this chapter is the profound persuasive
power that alienating self-states hold over the patient ’s mind. How can it be that
individuals can feel so bad about themselves and appear to hold on to this vision of
being worthless in the face of either contrary evidence or a positive and supporting
environment that does not see them in that way? We believe that this issue is intimately
linked to identity and personality [ 19]. Indeed, the way that individuals define themselves
plays a role in the expression of how they experience mental pain, because individuals
experience crises as “who they are ”rather than “what they have. ”To put it plainly, the
alien self is part of any individual —in a crisis, it comes to be not part but the totality of
being, a kind of defining hypothesis of one ’s identity: “My life is like this because I am
such a useless person. ”Now, coming back to the emergency intervention process, it can
perhaps be more easily perceived that what we are trying to do is to re-establish balance
so that the alien self is not alone but surrounded by other functional parts of the self and
others. It is important that clinicians do not try to persuade these patients that they are
“wrong ”about their alien experience of themselves —no clinician can be more persuasive
than an alien self.Mentalizing and Emergency Care 381
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Working through the contextual domains will provide an opportunity to co-create a
formulation as the hospitalization period enters its third and fourth steps. By this time
the patient ’s acute distress will have decreased to a tolerable level, and the staff should
have almost finished investigating all of the contextual domains that require integration
with the nature of self-alienating experiences that have emerged within the subjective
experience of the patient. More concretely, the staff will have met the patient ’s family and
other individuals who are susceptible to impact, and who can help with the resolution of
the crisis. Contact is also initiated with the outpatient treatment team or therapist to
assist in collecting the contextual information and to assess the feasibility and organiza-
tion of pursuing treatment after the hospitalization period has ended.
Integration and Formulation of the Crisis Area
Hospitalization is likely to stir up a variety of experiences, memories, and feelings for
patients. Although staff members strive to offer a clear understanding of all the elements
that the patient brings up, this task is ultimately impossible. The staff are more likely to
be helpful if they give the patient their sensitive and attuned attention while striving to
expand on the essential lines of tension that have brought the patient to the point of
crisis. Therefore the formulation in the hospital emergency setting, which is elaborated
by the staff and the patient together in the final days of the hospitalization period,
attempts to collate the main points that have been discussed and learned about the crisis
during the stay, and it eschews the impulse to want to understand everything and offer
all-encompassing explanations. To help to achieve this, the emergency care formulation
is structured by the following main headings:
1. emergence of a crisis
2. activating resources
3. do ’s and don ’ts (crisis plan)
4. anticipating future treatment.
Emergence of a Crisis
In the first section of the formulation, the patient is encouraged to note down what they
have learned from the emergence of crises in the past through to the present episode, and
how they might notice a crisis emerging in the future. With regard to attachment, the
patient will be encouraged to reflect on what they can control in their relationships, as
well as what they have to gain and what they might lose if they do not employ their usual
relational strategies. With regard to mentalizing, the staff and patient will attempt to
identify the main triggers that reduce the patient ’s mentalizing, as well as what makes it
difficult for them to recover mentalizing. With regard to alienating self-experience, some
thought will be given to the parts of the self that the patient wished to avoid or destroy by
self-harming or ending their life, and how thoughts about self-harm may indeed signal
specific ways of experiencing the self. Discussions about ways to prevent such self-
alienating experiences from overwhelming the patient take place at this time.
Figure 18.3 shows an example of this section of the formulation.
Activating Resources
In the second section of the formulation (e.g., see Figure 18.4 ), the staff and the patient
consider agency, in particular the identification of resources that can be activated382 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
when the patient identifies a new crisis emerging. Some psychoeducation on the benefits
of mentalizing, together with personalized examples during the hospitalization period
and in the patient ’s general life, may help the patient to formulate how mentalizing might
be helpful in the future. The issue of trust in oneself and others is discussed from the
perspective of thinking about ways to activate trust in situations where it seems to
be challenged.
Do ’s and Don ’ts (Crisis Plan)
The crisis plan (e.g., see Figure 18.5 ) maps out “do’s and don ’ts”to help to manage
crisis situations. The “who, when, what, where ”of helpful and unhelpful elements of a
crisis are spelled out for the patient to make explicit some of the processes that tend1. Noticing crisis emergence
With Jeremy: I become needy and he becomes
disrespectful
When he responds he makes me feel like he’s the only
one who sees who I really  am. Without this I would
need to find other ways of feeling appreciated by him.
Him ignoring me
People not taking me seriously
Feeling alone
Feeling stupid
Thinking I’ll never be loved, I’ll be alone forever
Being a failure1. Noticing crisis emergence
 Relationship(s) pattern(s)  Relationship(s) pattern(s):
Benefits from/cost of these patterns:
 Mentalizing stoppers:
 Attitudes and emotions making things worse:
 Unbearable state(s) that ma y lead to serious self-harm:
 What did I wish to avoid/destroy by my serious self-harm?  Benefits from/cost of these patterns
 Mentalizing stoppers 
 Attitudes and emotions making things worse
 Unbearable state(s) that may lead to serious
     self-harm 
 What did I wish to avoid/destroy by my serious
     self-harm? 
Fig. 18.3 Example of Section 1 of the crisis formulation, with headings on the left-hand side and the patient ’s
formulation on the right-hand side.
2. Activating resources
 What are the benefits of mentalizing?
Taking a step back, or seeing things from above ->
Calms me down and de-dramatizes 
Speaking to friends -> Thinking that I may be
exaggerating, and they normalize situations
Just taking a step back
 How would I try to reactivate trust in others?
I don’t know, maybe asking them if I am burdening
them?
 How would I try to reactivate trust in myself?
Do an activity I’m good at
Try to meet new people
Start playing football again, or another sport2. Activating resources
 What are the benefits of mentalizing?
 How would I try to reactivate trust in others?
 How would I try to reactivate trust in myself?
Fig. 18.4 Example of Section 2 of the crisis formulation, with headings on the left-hand side and the patient ’s
formulation on the right-hand side.Mentalizing and Emergency Care 383
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
to repeat themselves, leading to negative spirals, as well as the elements of coping that
seem to work or that could be enriched.
Anticipating Future Treatment
The fourth section of the formulation (e.g., see Figure 18.6 ) is devoted to projecting
oneself into the future, specifically within a therapeutic framework. The staff engage the
patient in thinking about the elements that are likely to make treatment useful and also
those that might be unhelpful. In addition, the staff strive to set an agenda of meetings
with professionals from the mental health network. Research shows that around 50% of
rehospitalizations usually occur within the first 6 months [ 20], and that access to care is a
key variable contributing to positive outcomes. The staff also encourage the patient to
imagine some of the areas of work for future therapy.3. Do’s and Don’ts (Crisis plan)
 Signals of crisis: 
Feeling needy, desperate to make things magically
better again, losing control over self-harming thoughts
 Do’s:
Who: 1) Jenny; 2) Tom or Michael; 3) Mum
Where: outside generally, park, maybe gym
What has worked in the past: 
Calling people
Getting busy with work
Shutting off phone and social media profiles
 Don’ts:
What: Ruminate and harass my boyfriend
Who: I guess my boyfriend, sometimes
Where: I should avoid going to parties with him, I get 
jealous
What has failed in the past: 
Yelling at peopleSelf-harming (wrists)
Believing everything can change quickly3. Do’s and Don’ts (Crisis plan)
 Signals of crisis:
 Do’s:
Who:
Where:
What has worked in the past:
 Don’ts:
What:
Who:
Where:
What has failed in the past:
Fig. 18.5 Example of Section 3 of the crisis formulation, with headings on the left-hand side and the patient ’s
formulation on the right-hand side.
4. Anticipation of future treatment
 What are the elements that are likely to make treatment
useful?
Someone who will be active in therapy and give me good
advice
 What are the elements that are likely to make treatment
not useful?
Making me feel judged, like I am not understanding or
being the right way
 Agenda: What is my therapeu tic agenda in the next two
months? 
Before I leave the hospital, I’d like to set at least one
date per week for therapy or meeting with a nurse.
Right now, I’ve got a date for next week only
 What do I think I need to work on? 
Why I despise myself so much and let other people walk
all over me4. Anticipation of future treatment
 What are the elements th at are likely to make
treatment useful?
 What are the elements th at are likely to make
treatment not useful?
 Agenda: What is my th erapeutic agenda in the
next two months? 
 What do I think I need to work on?
Fig. 18.6 Example of Section 4 of the crisis formulation, with headings on the left-hand side and the patient ’s
formulation on the right-hand side.384 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Preparation for Discharge
Discharge is a part of the process that in almost all cases will activate anxiety and
therefore a potential relapse in mentalizing. As the patient prepares to face their world
again, it is not surprising that they may show a noticeable reduction in their mental
functioning, or their mind organizes in a pseudomentalizing mode to “keep it together. ”
It is important that the staff carry on their work in the same way and avoid providing
anxious mirroring in the face of the return of the patient ’s symptoms.
An important aspect of preparation for discharge is to concretely plan the week
ahead and make sure that appropriate contact has been made with the outpatient
therapist, team, or clinic. There is a risk of treatment dropout after hospitalization,
and this is associated with a significantly increased risk of relapse with suicidal
crises. Therefore everything that can be put in place during the intensive assessment
phase can contribute to reducing the risk of a crisis recurring. For example, the clinician
who is offering follow-up may visit the patient, contact with the outpatient team is
organized, or other arrangements are made to facilitate the transition from one team to
the next.
The identification of resources, the formulation, and the crisis plan all contribute to
the safe discharge of the patient. Social and interpersonal resources are key to fostering a
sense of belongingness and to ensuring that human contact is available in times of need.
Self-stigma is another problem, because individuals who have been hospitalized can
ruminate on themselves as being “weak ”because they have needed psychiatric hospital-
ization. Others may feel a sense of disconnection, or even be afraid of such levels of
distress returning. As the hospitalization ends, it is important for the staff to check these
risk factors and attempt to provide some support in dealing with the challenges that the
patient faces. Crises are recognized by the staff as moments of distress, but also as
moments of plasticity and change. In every crisis lies an opportunity to effect change and
increase agency in one ’s life. Maintaining a positive outlook on this period is important
for the staff, as this helps patients to maintain a balance between shame, self-criticism,
and engaging with themselves to increase agency and connectedness with their social and
interpersonal resources.
When human contact and epistemic trust have been rekindled during the assessment
and stabilization phase, they can powerfully and favorably orient the life trajectory of the
patient toward increased self-care, thereby directly contributing to a positive outcome. If
the emergency service staff can be remembered by the patient as people who really cared
and tried to be helpful to them, much of the work has been accomplished.
Concluding Remarks
MBT can be applied to inform emergency care in psychiatry. Indeed, many professionals
who are working in the setting of emergency care have completed training in specialized
therapeutic methods such as MBT or DBT to increase their skills in working with
individuals who meet the diagnostic criteria for BPD. This chapter goes a step further
in proposing a model of structured care —using a mentalizing framework for short-term
hospitalization or crisis intervention in emergency care —that may be beneficial for
individuals who are struggling with an acute crisis. Alienating self-experiences require
de-escalation, empathic validation, and work toward a formulation of the crisis for the
patient to be able to meaningfully (re-)connect with an outpatient therapeutic programMentalizing and Emergency Care 385
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
and prevent further instances of self-harm. Research is under way to investigate whether
such mentalization-informed care helps to reduce episodes of rehospitalization, increase
adherence to treatment recommendations, and support resilience in mental health
professionals who are working in the emotionally challenging environment of psychi-
atric emergency care services.
References
1. Bateman A, Fonagy P. Randomized
controlled trial of outpatient
mentalization-based treatment versus
structured clinical management for
borderline personality disorder. Am
J Psychiatry 2009; 166: 1355 –64.
2. Besch V, Greiner C, Magnin C et al.
Clinical characteristics of suicidal youths
and adults: a one-year retrospective study.
Int J Environ Res Public Health 2020; 17:
8733.
3. Besch V, Debbané M, Greiner C et al.
Emergency psychiatric management of
borderline personality disorder: towards
an articulation of modalities for
personalised integrative care. Encephale
2020; 46: 463 –70.
4. Prada P, Cole P, Bondolfi G et al.
Mentaliser en psychiatrie de liaison?
[Mentalizing in liaison psychiatry?]. Rev
Med Suisse 2017; 13: 363 –6.
5. James RK. Crisis interventions. In:
Norcross JC, VandenBos GR, Freedheim
DK, eds. APA Handbook of Clinical
Psychology , Vol. 3. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association,
2016; 387 –407.
6. Nizum N, Yoon R, Ferreira-Legere L et al.
Nursing interventions for adults
following a mental health crisis: a
systematic review guided by trauma-
informed principles. Int J Ment Health
Nurs 2020; 29: 348 –63.
7. Johnson S, Lamb D, Marston L et al. Peer-
supported self-management for people
discharged from a mental health crisis
team: a randomised controlled trial.
Lancet 2018; 392: 409 –18.
8. Henzen A, Moeglin C, Giannakopoulos P,
Sentissi O. Determinants of dropout in acommunity-based mental health crisis
centre. BMC Psychiatry 2016; 16: 111.
9. Heyland M, Johnson M. Evaluating an
alternative to the emergency department
for adults in mental health crisis. Issues
Ment Health Nurs 2017; 38: 557 –61.
10. Fonagy P, Gergely G, Jurist E, Target M.
Affect Regulation, Mentalization, and the
Development of the Self . New York, NY:
Other Press, 2002.
11. Jeammet P. La violence à l ’adolescence:
défense identitaire et processus de
figuration [Violence in adolescence:
identity defense and figuration process].
Adolescence 1997; 15: 305 –21.
12. Fonagy P, Target M. The mentalization-
focused approach to self pathology.
J Personal Disord 2006; 20: 544 –76.
13. Ferenczi S. Confusion of tongues between
adults and the child (the language of
tenderness and of passion). Int J
Psychoanal 1949; 30: 225 –30.
14. Gergely G, Watson JS. The social
biofeedback theory of parental affect-
mirroring: the development of emotional
self-awareness and self-control in infancy.
Int J Psychoanal 1996; 77: 1181 –212.
15. Fotopoulou A, Tsakiris M. Mentalizing
homeostasis: the social origins of
interoceptive inference.
Neuropsychoanalysis 2017; 19:3–28.
16. Fonagy P, Campbell C. What touch can
communicate: commentary on
“Mentalizing homeostasis: the social
origins of interoceptive inference ”by
Fotopoulou and Tsakiris.
Neuropsychoanalysis 2017; 19:3 9–42.
17. Walter M, Genest P. Réalités des urgences
en psychiatrie [The reality of psychiatric
emergencies]. L’Inform Psychiatr 2006;
82: 565 –70.386 Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
18. Seletti B. Situations psychiatriques dans
un service d ’urgence [Psychiatric
situations in an emergency department].
Ann Méd Psychol Rev Psychiatr 2002; 160:
187–91.
19. Luyten P, Fonagy P. Integrating and
differentiating personality andpsychopathology: a psychodynamic
perspective. J Pers 2022; 90:7 5–88.
20. Li X, Srasuebkul P, Reppermund S,
Trollor J. Emergency department
presentation and readmission after index
psychiatric admission: a data linkage
study. BMJ Open 2018; 8: e018613.Mentalizing and Emergency Care 387
h di 00 98088960 409 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Index
Numbers: bold = box or table, italics = figure;
numbers within a span are listed first(e.g., 279,284, 278 –86);
small words ( “and ”,“as”,“at”,“for”,“from ”,“in”)arealphabetized.
action mind, 83, 127
action person, 65–66
adaptive hyporesponsivity,
282
Adaptive Mentalization-Based
Integrative Treatment.
SeeAMBIT
adolescence, x, 8, 11, 177, 237,
299, 303, 308
defining feature, 9
adolescents, xii, 16 –18, 29,
222, 305, 328 –39, 356
Adult Attachment Interview,
210
adult mentorship (CAPSLE),
355
affect focus, 129 –30, 171, 194,
197, 245 –46
affect regulation, 19, 43, 119,
212, 328 –29
affective mirroring, 369 –70
characteristics, 369
affective narrative
psychosis patients, 273
affective reflection
trauma sufferers, 290
affective states, 45, 47
age,16, 278
agency, 10, 12, 16, 21, 78 –79,
84, 198, 215, 235, 259,
261, 263, 266, 268, 385
children, 322
recovery from crisis episode,
365
suicide attempts, 367 –68
agency –alienation continuum,
369
aggression, 15, 184, 190,
193 –95, 200, 282, 285
Airaldi C, 11
alexithymia, 213, 216, 223,
225, 305
definition, 211alien self, 12–13, 120, 176, 209,
244, 266, 302, 310, 329,
367, 381
adolescents, 334
definition, 12
psychological crisis, 368 –70
alienating self-experiences,
368, 370, 374, 382
triggers, 369
alienation, 153, 180, 202, 253,
260
altercentric bias, 214
AMBIT, 311, 362
complex cases, 354
draws on mentalizing
theory, 355
epistemic trust principle,
354
keyworker role, 354 –55
mentalizing professional
community, 353 –55
model structure, 354
origins, 353
starting assumption, 354
AMBIT wheel, 354
amygdala, 211, 235, 281
anger, 164, 168, 183 –84, 188,
190, 198, 335, 343
Anna Freud Centre, xiii, 360
anorexia nervosa (AN), 298,
300–1, 300, 306 –8
interpersonal difficulties,
305
persistence, 303 –4
social functioning
(impairment), 305
antisocial personality disorder,
xi, 28, 45, 54, 69, 116,
143, 174 –202
addressing equality versus
hierarchy, 181 –83
Bryan case study, 181, 182
formulation, 181 –84James case study, 200
links with BPD and NPF,
174
primary emphasis of
change, 175
antisocial personality disorder
(MBT aims), 174 –78
changing identity and
achieving desistance, 174
mentalizing and violence,
175 –78
anxiety, 17,56, 194 –95, 211
interaction with
mentalizing, 45
apologies (effective), 352
arguments, 160
ASPD. Seeantisocial
personality disorder
assessment sessions, 138
at-risk patient, 117 –34
clinical top tips, 118
outside-in mind, 119
self-harm (function), 119
suicide attempts, self-harm,
violence (simplified
summary), 118 –20
teleological mode, 119
useful MBT principles,
129 –33
warning signs, 117
at-risk patient (clinical
intervention process),
120 –29
1. establish shared
responsibility, 121
2. safety planning (risk
assessment), 121 –23
3. focus on mental states
before event, 123 –25
4. exploration of context of
wellness, 125
5. mentalizing functional
analysis, 125 –28
388
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
6. identification of strategies
for managing mental
turmoil, 103
attachment, 281 –83
and MBT, 13–14
role in co-regulation of
stress, 237 –39
attachment anxiety, 46, 136,
176, 209, 238
relationship with
mentalizing quality, 45
attachment avoidance, 209,
238
attachment behavioral system,
279
attachment dimensions
relationship with
personality features
(depressed patients), 239
attachment insecurity, 308
link with eating disorders,
305
attachment loss, 130
attachment patterns
anxious-ambivalent, 61–62
anxious-avoidant, 61
insecure-ambivalent, 61
insecure-avoidant, 61
attachment problems, 232
attachment processes, 56,
60–62
attachment relationships, 13,
15, 233, 235, 249, 282,
304, 349
psychosis patients, 257
attachment security, 11, 61,
282, 299, 356 –57, 361
attachment strategies, 162,
212, 240 –41
attachment styles, 64
anxious-ambivalent, 66
DIT, 248
attachment system, 13–14, 44,
119, 123, 166, 177, 237,
241, 279, 284
attachment theory, 13, 225,
354
attachment trauma, xii, 22,
277 –78, 285 –86
re-enactment (types), 283,
284
attachment-deactivating
strategies, 238, 240, 282
attachment-hyperactivating
strategies, 240, 282
Auerbach JS, 261autism, 2, 25, 206, 307
autonomy, 245, 285, 338
avoidance, 188, 279
avoidant personality disorder,
xi, 55, 116, 203 –29
assessment, 206 –8
assessment
(hypermentalizing form),
207
assessment
(hypomentalizing form),
206
characteristic difficulty, 204
characteristics, 203
clinician boredom and
emotional numbness, 224
clinician challenge response
“unfair ”,207
clinician impatience, 207
clinician ’s counter-
response, 208
diagnosis, 203 –4
experience, 204 –5
fear of being found out or
exposed, 205
formulations (two-fold
challenge), 204
humiliation “critical issue ”,
205
Jane case study, 205,207,
217, 219 –20,221
MBT goal, 216
MBT-compatible evidence-
based approaches,
224 –25
paucity of research, 203
secondary avoidance
phenomenon, 208
therapeutic challenge,
216
treatment approach, 216 –24
avoidant personality disorder
(mentalizing difficulties),
209 –16
automatic/controlled, 209,
210 –11, 225
cognitive/affective, 210, 211,
225
external/internal, 210
formulation summary,
215 –16
internal/external, 212
self/other, 210, 212 –15, 217,
224, 226
self/other (three aspects),
216avoidant personality disorder
(treatment approach),
216 –24
affect focus and relational
mentalizing, 220 –22
calibrating internal
experience and external
reality, 220 –22
compassionate challenge,
221
counter-relational
responsiveness, 222
formulation, 217
formulation (side effects of
intervention), 218
hypermentalizing in
pretend mode,
222
memory elaboration and
imagery, 223
playfulness in MBT,
223
reducing influence of inner
eye,219 –20
supervision, 224
tackling excess focus on self,
219 –20
avoidant personality disorder
(treatment phase)
attachment strategies,
209
limitations, 208
mentalizing difficulties,
209 –16
AvPD. Seeavoidant
personality disorder
basic emotion
driver of existence, 71
Bateman A, 2, 28, 69
Beeney JE, 209
beliefs, 1
Besch V, 364
bifactor modelling
definition, 18
bingeing, 309
biobehavioral systems, 278,
279,281
Blatt SJ, 261
Bleiberg E, 347
Bleuler E, 260
body posture, 58, 151, 199,
266
body –feeling scan (MBT-F
exercise), 343
boom brain, 127, 129Index 389
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
borderline personality
disorder, 12, 14, 116, 155,
161, 162, 231, 365, 372,
See also Sarah case study
difficulties experienced, 14
emotional state
(interference with
decision making), 126
epistemic mistrust
(development), 22–24
links with BPD and NPF, 174
and MBT, 14–15
mentalizing, 15–17, 25
mistrust (core feature), 21
online treatment, 149
push-me-pull-you
dynamics, 204
relational and attachment
problems “central ”,128
symptoms, 15
brain, 13, 18, 59, 213, 263, 306,
328
connections between
different areas
(problems), 18
breakout rooms, 150 –52
Brentano FC, 1
broaden-and-build cycles, 282
Bruch H, 298 –99
bubble mode, 66, 83
bulimia nervosa (BN), 300,
303, 306
bullying, 12, 306, 329, 355 –56
Burlingham D, 26
calendar, 324
Cambridge Guide to
Mentalization-Based
Treatment
book aim, ix
book focus, ix
practicality, 2
Campbell C, 22, 370
CAPSLE
components, 355
focus, 356
mentalizing programme for
schools, 355 –56
whole-school approach, 355
caregivers, 9–11, 13, 330, 369
Carer APP, 360
Carer Map, 360
challenge, 197
MBT for couples, 351
chameleon effect, 170
chat mode, 146, 189Child in Need, 62,81, 82, 84
child protection team, 128,
179, 182, 200
childhood, x, 8 –9, 225
childhood adversity, 22, 82,
177
childhood trauma, 23, 25, 279
child-o-scopes (MBT-F
exercise), 345
children, xii, 18 –19, 319 –27,
344 –45,See also MBT for
children
classroom management plan
(CAPSLE), 355
clinical process
MBT step-by-step guide,
52–135
at-risk patient, 120 –29
clinician –patient interaction,
44, 108, 152, 163, 170 –71,
246
sitting “side-by-side ”(rather
than “opposite ”),107
clinicians
assessment by patients, 163
AvPD “special challenge ”,
203
counter-responsiveness, 129
humility demanded, 109
interpersonal strengths and
mentalizing weak spots,
116
mentalization-based
treatment, 43–51
must quarantine own
feelings, 109
personal psychology, 109
personal safety, 197
secondary avoidance, 222
sensitive spots, 113
Cochrane Reviews
MBT and BPD (2020),
27
self-harm in adolescents, 29
cognitive-behavioral therapy,
298, 319
Cohen ’sd,11
collaboration, 48–49
collaborative clinical
agreement, 63, 66, 167
collective mentalizing, 143 –44
co-mentalizing, 21
couples, 347, 351
families, 340, 343
communication, 57, 304, 349,
376communication systems,
26–27, 244, 246 –48,
287 –88, 362
1. teaching and learning of
content, 26
2. re-emergence of
mentalizing, 26
3. applying social learning
in wider environment, 27
compassion, 25, 171
complex trauma, xii, 278, 282,
285 –86
definition, 277
computer games, 22, 148
context, xii, 198
contextual domains template
(emergency care), 380
contrary moves, 79
conversational partners,
49–50, 53, 57 –58, 68, 170,
291
patient –clinician versus
patient –patient, 141
core self-disturbance, 261,
263 –64, 269, 274
clinical intervention
(guiding principles), 272
definition, 265
links to non-mentalizing
modes and cycles of non-
mentalizing, 265 –67
non-mentalizing cycles,
267
triggers, 266, 271
counter-relational
mentalizing, 108 –13, 171
definition, 109
Stanley case study, 112
suggested four-step
procedure, 109
counter-relational responses,
115 –16
couples, xii, 347 –52
Covid-19 pandemic, 148, 263
Creating A Peaceful School
Learning Environment.
SeeCAPSLE
criminal justice system, 178,
201
crisis planning, 121, 149
cultural learning, 20
culture, 10, 353
curiosity, 269, 269, 287, 292,
323, 330 –31, 345, 350
cyberball paradigm, 25
definition, 24390 Index
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
DBT. Seedialectical behavior
therapy
decentration, 212 –13
definition, 212
decompensation
psychosis patients, 264
default mode network (DMN),
18
delusion, 265, 272
democracy, 48–49, 103, 108
Denmark, 28–29
Dennett D, 2
depression, xii, 17, 216,
230 –52
attachment styles
(individual differences),
235
attachment, mood,
mentalizing, resilience
(relationship in face of
adversity), 234
clinical features (typical),
235
clinician contrary moves,
236
clinician feelings of
aggression or boredom,
236
clinician loss of mentalizing
capacity, 247
comorbidity with chronic
pain and fatigue, 234
dynamic interpersonal
therapy, 247 –49
MBT clinician (key task),
245
mentalizing profiles, 235
mild to moderate, 245
mild to moderate (Mark
case study), 230
moderate to severe (Lucy
case study), 231
moderate to severe
(mentalization-based
treatment), 245 –47
severe to very severe
(Angela case study), 231
severity continuum, 232,
249
severity continuum
(features), 230
spectrum of mentalization-
based interventions,
244 –49
depression (mentalizing
approach), 233 –44attachment (role in co-
regulation of stress),
237 –39
embodied mentalizing,
241 –44
epistemic trust, 244
intervention to support
mentalizing process and
attachment strategies,
240 –41
mood and mentalizing,
233 –37
depression treatment
adaptations of MBT model,
233
mental-process and mental-
representation
approaches, 232
depressive experiences, 232
desistance, 174 –75, 177, 184
influences, 175
destructive action pathway,
119
detached protector mode
definition, 225
developmental perspective,
158, 358
developmental stages, x, 338
depression risk, 237
developmental theory, 323,
370
Developmentally Directed
Time-Limited
Psychotherapy for
Children, 324
dialectical behavior therapy,
15, 27, 225, 364, 385
dis-integration
AMBIT terminology, 354
dissociation, 14, 279, 293, 308
DIT. Seedynamic
interpersonal therapy
domestic violence, 62
dropouts, 225, 281, 298, 311,
385
drug addiction, 53
DSM, 155, 203, 253
dynamic interpersonal
therapy, 231, 244
depression, 247 –49
original model, 248
phases, 248
dynamic interpersonal therapy
for complex care
(DITCC), 231, 245, 249
extended DIT model, 248Eating Disorder Examination,
29
eating disorders, xii, 298 –318
core, 304
emotional self as core
component, 307
epistemic mistrust model
(summary), 308 –9
pathway, 304
persistence, 303 –4
social dysfunction, 304
ultimately disorders of self-
function, 314
Ebert A, 23
ecophenotype
definition, 278
effective mentalizing, 341
MBT for couples, 350
underpinning, 345
egocentricity bias, 214, 216, 223
abandonment
requirements, 219
inhibition, 220
ego-syntonicity, 310 –11
Eisenberger NI, 24–25
elephant in room, 152,
171 –72, 220, 299
exploring affect focus, 103
psychosis patients, 273
shame, 188
embodied mentalizing, 72,
234, 239 –40, 312
depressed patients, 241 –44
eating disorders, 298
RADLE sequence, 242
emergency care, xii, 370, See
alsoMBT-informed
emergency care
focus of interventions, 367
formulation, 373
mentalizing, 364 –87
psychoeducational
elements, 379
research under way, 386
emergency care (intake
process), 373 –80
1. receiving request for
hospitalization, 373 –75
2-3. initial meeting with
patient and team debrief,
375 –80
emergency care formulation,
382
1. emergence of crisis, 382,
382
2. activating resources, 382Index 391
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
emergency care formulation
(cont.)
3. crisis plan, 383, 384
4. anticipating future
treatment, 384
emergency care interviewing
(five themes), 375 –79
1. introductions, 376
2. exploration of crisis, 376
3. contextualizing, 377
4. experience in session, 377
5. planning hospital stay
and two-level contract,
379
emergency hospitalization
admission to discharge
(overview), 372
emergency psychiatry
sequence of unfolding crisis
intervention, 371
emergency room visits, 28
emotional arousal, 23–24, 119,
216, 224
emotional dysregulation, 14,
19, 55, 127
domain associated with
mental disorder, 19
emotional intelligence, 25, 307
emotional regulation, 12, 84,
305
strategies, 56, 279, 288
emotional self, 307
empathic emotional
validation, 47, 83, 169
components, 71
empathy, 7, 10, 25, 72, 113,
179, 323 –24
employment, 193,262
emptiness feelings, 55, 60
environmental factors, 254,
329
epistemic hypervigilance,
303 –4, 308 –11
epistemic match, 21, 26
epistemic mistrust
definition, 22
development, 22–24
eating disorders, 308 –9
epistemic trust, x, 17 –21, 49,
103, 115, 153, 170, 172,
175, 216, 222, 225, 235,
238, 245, 248, 287, 343,
356, 376, 378, 385
biobehavioral system, 279
definition, x–xi, 19
depressed patients, 244dimensions, 22
impairments, 232
MBT for couples, 351
not-knowing stance, 269
problems (trauma patients),
285
systemic, 354
equity, 48–49, 129
importance, 106
Euler S, 209, 212
everyday life, 155, 187
executive function
definition, 19
domain associated with
mental disorder, 19
experts by experience, 180,
184, 186
over-involvement, 185
exploring affect focus
definition, 103
eye movements, 58, 151, 199
Facebook, 194
facial expressions, 7, 16 –17,
22, 58, 151, 195, 199, 212,
214, 219, 322
false beliefs, 9–10
false self, 60, 158
families, xii, 340 –46,See also
MBT for families
(MBT-F)
mentalizing theory in wider
contexts, 356 –62
family communication,
344 –45
Faux Pas test, 25
fear, 5, 190, 195
feeling finder game, 223
felt feelings, 290
fight/flight/freeze responses,
45, 282 –83
first-order mentalizing, 131
first-person mentalizing,
215 –16
Fonagy P, 2, 15, 19, 28, 69,
299, 302, 321, 347,
369 –70
formulation, xi–xii, 138
agreed treatment goals, 64
aims, 62
anticipated treatment
difficulties, 64
attachment styles, 64
central component of MBT,
115
content, 63definition, 62
essential to be agreed with
patient, 62
focus on mental processes,
247
language, 62
MBT clinical process, 62–69
mentalizing vulnerabilities
and low-mentalizing
modes, 64
overall, 63
resilience, 64
vulnerability factors, 63
Fotopoulou A, 369
Freud A, 25
Freud S, 260
Frith U, 2
functional impairment
psychosis patients, 264
functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), 22,
211 –12
general psychopathology
factor ( p factor ),17–20
genetic approach
definition, 104
genetic factors, 18, 128
genetic risk, 18, 43
genetics, xii, 18, 254 –55, 308,
329, 335
Global Assessment of
Functioning, 28
Graham P, xiii
grandiose narcissism, 161,
166, 167, 173, 192
addressing interactive style,
160
characteristics, 156
same as “thick-skinned ”
narcissism, 156
Greiner C, 364
grey matter volume, 328
group leaders, 70
group therapy, 52,66, 268
group values, 150 –51
trauma patients, 289, 294
groups, xii
aim, xi
essential part of MBT, xi
groupthink, 197
guilt, 188, 236 –37
high persistent psychological
distress, 19
hippocampus, 235, 281392 Index
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
Hooley JM, 23
hospitalization, 28, 264,
364 –65, 368, 371 –72
housing, 179, 191 –92
humiliation, 157, 168, 192 –93,
198, 201
humility, 243, 246
humor, 98, 222, 270
hyperactivation, 14,162
hyperarousal, 279, 282
hyperembodiment
depressed patients, 234
hypermentalizing, 48, 90, 165,
209, 211, 214, 217, 220,
224 –25, 300, 306, 330,
332
adolescents, 334 –35
block to progress, 218
definition, 211
depressed patients, 236 –37
hyper-reflectivity, 261 –62,
268, 273
extreme form of pretend
mode, 265
hypersensitivity, 11, 14, 16, 25,
157, 160, 240 –41
hypervigilance, 279, 282, 285
hypoactivation, 162, 170
hypomentalizing, 209, 211,
217, 220, 225, 246, 306
definition, 211
depressed patients, 236 –37
hypothalamic –pituitary –
adrenal (HPA) axis,
281 –82
iatrogenic effects, 166, 244,
298, 314
ICD-11, 155, 203
identity, 174 –75, 204, 311
identity affect, 313
I-mode, 106 –7, 158, 166 –67,
169 –70, 173, 183, 186,
218, 291
impersonal trauma, 278
impulsive behavior
intervention algorithm, 130
impulsivity, 15, 28, 53 –55, 62,
122–23, 140, 208, 328
individual therapy, 52, 268
ineffective mentalizing, 59,
131, 159, 208, 225, 305
eating disorders, 299 –301
hallmarks, 299
key factor (eating
disorders), 309infancy, 334, 360
infants, 9, 12 –13, 20, 101, 106,
370
inside-out mind, 68, 127, 179,
299
characteristic, 83
intentional stance, 1–2
internet connections, 151
interpersonal affective focus,
247 –48
emphasis on content,
247
interpersonal context, 99–100,
127, 198 , 214
interpersonal interactions, 15,
17, 43, 47, 55 –56, 61, 123,
133, 215
interpersonal problems, 12,
14, 28, 54
interpersonal relationships,
44, 60, 205, 287
trauma patients, 278,
288
interpersonal trust, 15, 101
interpretation
definition, 108
intrapersonal functions, 119
IPAF. Seeinterpersonal
affective focus
irritation, 171
James RK, 365
James W, 213
jealousy, 333, 343
Johnson S, 367
know and now mind, 83,
127
Lieb K, 2
Lighthouse project, 268
listening, x,139,141–42,
162 –63,165, 172, 182,
200, 291
London Parent –Child Project,
357
look, 200
trigger for aggression and
violence, 200
low mentalizing, 129, 341
clinician intervention,
82–97
pretend mode, 90–97
low mentalizing, 176, 181, 195,
208, 375, 377
Lysaker PH, 261major depressive disorder, 17,
22, 116, 231
Malle BF, 8
Maresh EL, 213
marked mirroring, 101, 158,
235, 240 –41, 243 –44,
284 –85, 323, 326, 331,
369
Maudsley Model of Anorexia
Nervosa Treatment for
Adults (MANTRA), 298
MBT. Seementalization-based
treatment
MBT clinical process
adaptations of MBT model,
117 –34
final phase, 53
formulation, 62–69
general strategies, 52
individual sessions
(structure), 71–113
initial phase, 52, 54 –62
MBT supervision, 113 –17
psychoeducation (MBT-I),
69–71
at-risk patient, 117 –34
specific strategies, 53
step-by-step guide, 52–135
treatment phase, 52, 71 –113
MBT clinical process (initial
phase), 54–62
assessment, 54–55
assessment of mentalizing
profile, 55–58
attachment processes, 60–62
ineffective mentalizing,
59–60
MBT for adolescents (key
concepts), 330 –35
alien self, 334
basic mentalizing, 333
clarification, elaboration,
challenge, 331
hypermentalizing, 334
mentalizing clinician –
patient relationship, 334
support and empathy, 331
MBT for adolescents
(MBT-A), 328 –39
central focus, 333
clinical example (Eddie),
329, 334 –35
clinical example (Holly),
332
clinical example (Maya),
330, 333Index 393
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
MBT for adolescents
(MBT-A) (cont.)
core (mentalizing stance),
331
empathic exploration, 332
more research needed, 328
techniques, 331
MBT for adolescents
(structure), 335 –38
assessment, 335
final phase, 337
initial phase, 336 –37
initial phase (clinical
example), 336
initial phase (contract), 337
initial phase (crisis plan),
336
initial phase (formulation),
336
initial phase
(psychoeducation), 337
middle phase, 337
MBT for children (MBT-C),
319 –27
aims, 319
Belinda case study, 320
clarifying and naming
feelings, 323
format, 319
mentalizing stance, 320 –21
mirroring and contingent
responding, 322
Mohammed case study,
320, 322
responding to breakdowns
in mentalizing, 323
right intervention at right
moment, 322
therapeutic contract, 319
time and use of a calendar,
324
MBT for children (play-
centered approach),
321 –22
mentalizing play, 321
problems with symbolic
play, 322
stimulating play narrative,
321
MBT for children (structure),
324 –26
assessment phase (3 –4
meetings), 324
developing a formulation,
325
review meeting, 325sessions 1 –3 (initial phase),
325
sessions 4 –8 (middle phase),
325
sessions 9 –12 (ending
phase), 326
MBT for couples (intervention
spectrum), 350 –52
challenge and therapeutic
bargain, 351
clarification, affect focus,
elaboration, 350
empathy, support,
validation, 350
repairing mentalizing and
epistemic trust, 351
MBT for couples (MBT-CO),
347 –52
central tenet, 349
clinical example, 348
formulation, 348
relationship quality (initial
assessment), 347
MBT for couples (structure),
347 –50
highlighting and marking
mentalizing, 350
holding balance, 349
interrupting non-
mentalizing, 349
mentalizing stance, 349
MBT for eating disorders
(MBT-ED), 298 –318
MBT for eating disorders
(treatment model),
309 –15
focus, 310
formulation, 312
general approach, 309 –11
group therapy, 314
individual therapy,
313 –14
Mary case study, 313
psychoeducational groups,
314
MBT for families (MBT-F),
340 –46
clinical example (mind-
reading stethoscope
exercise), 345
exercises, 342 –46
key objective, 340
MBT loop, 341 –42
mentalizing stance, 340
purpose, 340
task of clinician, 341MBT for trauma, 286 –88
core feature, 286
crucial consideration, 287
essential component
(supervision), 287
general principles, 286 –87
key to process, 287
mentalizing traumatic
experiences, 288
specific principles, 287 –88
specific principles
(summary), 288
MBT Group, x, 52, 69, 136 –53,
294
collaborative and
democratic process, 142
macro versus micro culture,
136
mentalizing culture
(components), 137
online, 150 –52
session trajectory, 137
structure, 136 –37
values, 137
MBT Group (clients with
ASPD), 183 –201
agreed values, 185
Bryan case study, 180–81,
186–87
discussion of values before
entry to group, 182
engagement in treatment,
179
format of treatment, 178
MBT-I for MBT-ASPD-G,
183 –84
meeting an expert by
experience, 185
preparation, 178 –81
randomized control trial (in
progress), 201
self-agency, 186 –90
structure of group,
185 –90
treatment process
(summary), 179
MBT Group (clients with
ASPD) (common clinical
problems), 190 –201
clinician reponses, 192 –93,
195, 197 –201
defiance, 193
emotional expression (self ),
198
emotion recognition in
other (misused), 199394 Index
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
escalating threats (client to
client), 194
escalating threats (client to
clinician), 196
examples, 191
idealization of themselves as
group, 197
moving external mental
focus to internal focus
(other), 199
paranoid reactions, 200
paranoid reactions
(clinician options), 201
recruitment to cause, 191
MBT Group (engaging new
patient), 138 –41
1. clinician introduces
members to new patient,
138
2. personal introductions
(prepared week before)
delivered, 138 –39
3. discussion of group
values, 140
MBT Group (members)
Cora, 140,143,145, 148
John, 141,143,145, 147
Stanley, 145,147, 147, 151
MBT Group (stimulating
interpersonal
mentalizing), 141 –48
allocation of protagonists of
discussion, 142
closure, 147 –48
purpose of group, 142
role play and exercises,
146 –47
triangulation leading to
four-way (or more)
interaction, 143 –44
MBT Group online
individual therapy, 152
MBT Introductory Group
(MBT-I), x, 26, 69 –71,
103, 127, 136, 198
format, 69
goals (important factors), 69
not-knowing stance, 78
online, 149
purpose, 69
role of group leader, 70
session principles, 70
session structure, 70
topics, 70
MBT Introductory Group for
MBT-ASPD-Gattachment module, 184
emotions module, 184
mentalizing modules, 183
violence module, 184
MBT Loop, 83,125, 180, 193,
201
families, 341 –42
three-step maneuver, 83
MBT online, 148 –53
assessment and
formulation, 149
MBT-G online, 150 –52
MBT-I online, 149
secure links, 149
MBT patient
typical (moderately
responsive), xi
MBT principles, 136
equality between patients
and clinicians, 153
openness of mind, 271
MBT supervision, 113 –17
ensuring mentalizing theory
links to clinical practice,
115
essential topics, 114
implementation and clinical
structures, 113
maintaining mentalizing of
clinician, 116 –17
skill in itself, 117
supervisor materials, 114
supporting refining of
clinical skills, 115 –16
tasks, 113
MBT supervisor
role, 113, 115, 117
MBT-ASPD-G. SeeMBT
Group (clients with
ASPD)
MBT-G. SeeMBT Group
MBT-I. SeeMBT Introductory
Group
MBT-informed emergency
care
clinical approach, 370 –73
criteria for admission, 371
four-step model, 364
from epistemic trust to
mentalizing crisis,
370 –73
summary, 372
MBT-informed emergency
care (four steps), 373 –85
1. intake and admission into
emergency care, 373 –792. uncovering crisis, 380 –82
3. integration and
formulation of crisis area,
382 –84
4. preparation for discharge,
385
MBT-NPD. SeeMBT for
narcissistic personality
disorder
MBT-Trauma Focused (MBT-
TF), xii, 278, 288 –94
phase 1 (establishing safety,
group values, treatment
framework), 289
phase 2 (mentalizing
trauma), 290 –94
phase 3 (review, reappraisal,
looking to future), 294
medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC), 9, 213 –14, 235,
281, 328
mediation techniques, 268,
270
Meehl P, 254
me-mode, 159, 166 –67, 169,
173, 181, 183, 186, 213,
215, 218, 224, 291
memory, 16, 18, 84, 186, 223,
292 –94
mental disorder, 18
defining feature, 4
mentalizing model, ix
no single cause, x
mental escape procedure,
118
mental health disorders
neuroscience (implication
of two domains of
functioning), 19
vulnerability (flipside of
advantages of
mentalizing), 4
mental health professionals,
12, 370, 374
MBT skills, 372
mental states, 1, 3, 5, 10, 48,
50, 109, 166, 192, 210
detailed consideration phase
(by clinician), 98
processing, 48
mentalization-based
treatment, ix
adaptations for mental
health presentations,
155 –73
aim, 129Index 395
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
mentalization-based treatment
(cont.)
application (settings),
319 –27
backbone, 157
central question, 29
clinical principles, x
clinician requirements, xi
Cochrane Review (2020),
27
collaborative discovery, 78,
107
communication systems,
26–27
constellation of
interventions, 44
core processes, 208
defining principle, 68
democracy principle, 103
developmental approach,
253
effectiveness (much further
to go), ix
empirical research, 27–29
essence, 107
focus on mentalizing
process, 48
general versus specific
(balance), x
history, 1–3
model overview, 1–3
non-judgmental stance, 157
origins, 2, 14
planning of supervision
sessions, 114
play-centered approach,
321 –22
practice, 136 –53
pragmatism, 2
primary objective, 44
prime idea, 2
psychoanalytic origins, 310
psychotherapy paradox, 44
purpose, ix
RCTs, 27–29
rejects notion of objectivity
in therapeutic setting,
109
research trials, 54
safety first (do no harm)
approach, 166
starting point for clinician,
175
supporting theory, 4–41
transdiagnostic approach,
xiimentalization-based treatment
(principle-driven
intervention), 44–50
activate relational process,
46
authenticity and “not-
knowing ”stance, 50
balance mentalizing, 46
democracy, equity,
collaboration, 48–49
empathic validation of
impact of experience, 47
manage anxiety, 45
process versus content, 47
mentalization-based treatment
(principles)
emotions and mentalizing,
45
mentalizing focus, 45
responsiveness of clinician,
45
mentalized affectivity
definition, 285
mentalizing
arriving at alternative
perspective, 107
basic techniques, 242
and BPD, 15–17
center of everything MBT
clinician does, xi
clinician required to see
things from patient ’s
perspective, xi
clinician –patient
relationship, 323
developmental aspects
(child, adolescent, adult),
8–10
developmental model, 334
difficulties, 8
emergence (impact of
environment), 10–12
emergency care, 364 –87
essence, 70
external versus internal
(families), 341
fragile capacity, 356
integrative function, 301 –2
interpersonal
understanding lens, xi
journey, not destination, 78,
104, 127
MBT for couples, 351
openness to different
perspectives, 48
origin of term, 2psychopathology, 17–19
purpose, 333
qualities and behaviors, 340
social learning and
epistemic trust, 17–21
social rejection, 24–25
understanding feelings, 2
mentalizing affective
narrative, 127
content, 98
mentalizing capacity, 9,279
mentalizing climate, 12, 355
mentalizing dimensions, 6–8,
46, 55, 64, 209, 349
automatic/controlled
mentalizing, 6, 15, 57 –58
cognitive/affective
mentalizing, 7,56, 235,
241, 263, 273
internal/external
mentalizing, 7, 16, 57 –58
self/other mentalizing, 6, 16,
56, 68, 79, 103 –4, 273
mentalizing foci for self
(Maresh and Andrews-
Hanna), 213
mentalizing functional
analysis, 125 –28,126,
128, 131, 351, 376
a. focus on affect and
contextualizing emotions,
126
b. management of mind
states, 127
c. identification of core
domain of problem, 127
d. establishing dominant
theme, 128
e. respect for subdominant
theme, 128
mentalizing impairments, 232,
240, 245, 266, 279, 281,
312
role in depression, 238
mentalizing in eating
disorders, 298 –309
anorexia nervosa
(persistence), 303 –4
attachment and eating
disorders, 305
conceptualizing complexity,
304 –5
embodied mentalizing, 298
ineffective mentalizing
modes, 299 –301
social self-regulation, 307396 Index
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
stress and mentalizing, 302
theory of mind and social
cognition, 306 –7
wish for non-mentalizing
space, 301 –2
mentalizing polarities. See
mentalizing dimensions
mentalizing process
management, 77–79
mentalizing profile, 55–58
mentalizing relationship. See
relational mentalizing
mentalizing theory, 303, 369
origins in psychoanalysis, 6
mentalizing trauma, 290 –94
affective reflection, 290
feelings and thoughts
surrounding trauma,
290 –93
framework, 291
relationships affected by
trauma, 293
mental-process focus, 244, 248
mental-representation focus,
238, 241, 244 –45, 248
mentors, 356
meta-analyses, 15–17, 27, 230,
305, 307
metacognition, 99, 131, 158,
261
metacognitive disorganization,
56
metacognitive interpersonal
therapy (MIT), 224 –25
meta-reflection
definition, 290
meta-therapeutic
definition, 98
micro-slicing, 241 –43, 287 –88
Midgley N, 319 –22
example of focus
formulation, 324
Miller CE, 55
Mills KL, 328
mind, 1–2
mind recalibration, 284 –85,
287
mind states, 46, 53
mind-brain scans, 221, 343
Minding the Baby, 356,
360 –62
emphasis, 361
integrative model, 361
interdisciplinary approach,
361
nurse ’s role, 361primary focus, 361
RCT, 361
social worker involvement,
361
mind-reading stethoscope
(MBT-F exercise), 345
mind-wandering, 16, 18
minimal impact resilience, 278
mood, 54, 236
mother –child relationship, 60
mothers, 12
anxiety level (impact on
children), 26
Movie for the Assessment of
Social Cognition
(MASC), 15
MTB. SeeMinding the Baby
narcissism
aspects, 155
attributes, 155
relational activation, 159
thick-skinned versus thin-
skinned, 156
narcissistic personality
disorder, xi, 143, 155 –73
assessment and
formulation, 166
dismissive attachment
strategies (indicators),
162
formulation, 164, 169
intervention (I-mode to me-
mode to we-mode), 167
James case study, 167, 168,
172
outcome of assessment
process, 163 –64
outcome of assessment
process (James case study
formulation), 164
outcome of assessment
process (James case
study), 163
research lacking, 155
narcissistic personality
disorder (assessment andformulation), 157 –62
grandiose narcissism
(interactive style), 160
narcissism and attachment
strategies, 162
narcissistic activation
(context), 159
narcissistic expectation and
disappointment, 160self and other mentalizing,
158
self-expectation, self-
devaluation (thin-
skinned narcissism), 161
narcissistic personality
disorder (mentalizing)
automatic and controlled
processing, 165
cognitive and affective
function, 165
relationships, 165
self and other experience,
164
narcissistic personality
disorder (session focus
and intervention),
166 –73
affect focus and narcissism,
171
counter-relational
mentalizing, 171
elephants in room, 171 –72
I-mode to me-mode to we-
mode, 169 –71
relational mentalizing,
169 –71
supporting narcissism to
establish alliance, 167
narcissistic personality
functioning, 155, 158,
160, 163
links with ASPD and BPD,
174
session focus and
intervention, 166 –73
natural selection, 4, 20
Netherlands, 28
network analysis, 306
neural circuits, 7, 235, 237
neuroscience, 4, 10, 19, 213,
235, 369
disconnects between
sensory and cognitive
integration, 263
psychosis patients, 261
neurotransmitter systems, 282
Nizum N, 367
non-judgmentalism, 99, 163,
188 –89, 320, 323, 331,
341, 349
non-mentalizing, 129, 131,
174, 184, 245, 330
couples, 352
eating disorders, 308
interruption, 341, 349Index 397
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
non-mentalizing (cont.)
quick reference, 59
verbal indicators, 132
non-mentalizing modes, 4–5,
59,71, 330, 347
clinical examples, 300–2
eating disorders, 301 –2
pretend mode, 5
psychic equivalence, 5
psychosis patients,
271 –72
teleological mode, 5
Norway, 28
notice and name, 83, 219
not-knowing, 50, 70 –71,72,
80, 104, 115, 125, 129,
137, 141, 144, 146, 151,
153, 163, 171, 180, 189,
207 –8, 217, 224 –25, 242,
244
aim, 77
burden on clincian, 269
emergency care, 376 –77
essence (process of
discovery), 79
identification of strategies
for tolerating mental
turmoil, 103
key points, 269
MBT for children, 322
psychosis patients, 269
purpose, 77
trauma patients, 287
treatment phase, 77–79
NPF. Seenarcissistic
personality functioning
Orme W, 22
ostension
definition, 304
outpatient treatment, 28, 364
outside-in mind, 65–66, 68,
80, 83, 127, 179, 299
at-risk patient, 119
over-imitation, 20
definition, 20
Overt Aggression Scale –
Modified, 184
oxytocin, 23
p factor ,216, Seegeneral
psychopathology factor
panic, 261, 329
paranoid thinking, 265
Parent Map, 357 –58
Parenting APP, 357parent-o-scopes (MBT-F
exercise), 345
parents, 11–12, 22, 162, 330,
336 –37, 341, 344 –45
mentalizing capacities, 13
mentalizing theory in wider
contexts, 356 –62
psychoeducation, 358
passivity, 71, 79
patients
conversational partners,
53
mentalization-based
treatment, 43–51
reflection versus reaction
(double-edged sword), 77
patients ’notes, 152
patterns of mutual regulation,
106
peer acceptance, 356
peer mentorship (CAPSLE),
355
Pennebaker JW, 298
perception, 263
personal narratives, 102
personal second-order
mentalizing, 7, 131
Personality Belief
Questionnaire, 22
personality disorders, xii, 17,
245
categorization failure, 174
philosophy, 165
physical education
programme (CAPSLE),
355
physical reality, 5,58, 148,
157, 214 –15, 224, 300
playfulness, 146, 223, 226, 268,
270, 345
essential component of
MBT, 343
poor urban communities, 12
positive climate campaign
(CAPSLE), 355
post-traumatic stress disorder,
25,54, 178, 216, 277, 280
power differentials, 48–49
Prada P, 364
prefrontal cortex, 18, 22, 281
pregnancy, 11
pre-mentalizing, 5, 8, 370
pretend mode, 5, 48, 59–60,
60, 62, 64, 78, 90 –97, 126,
147, 152, 155 –57, 162,
176 –77, 183, 189, 191,197, 207 –8, 211, 215, 217,
247, 268, 293
anxiety (after bubble
popped), 97
clinical example, 300
clinician ’s response,
91
dangers, 97
depressed patients, 236, 240
eating disorders, 300, 303,
308, 313, 314
hypermentalizing, 222
patient ’s purpose, 91
result, 91
trauma patients, 284
pretend we-mode, 170
primates, 9, 20
priors, 263
pseudomentalizing, 5, 239,
246, 300, 332, 334
psychiatric care
relative criteria, 371
strong criteria, 371
psychiatric disorders, 18
psychiatric emergency care,
364 –65, 368, 386
psychic equivalence, 5, 59, 59,
62,64, 68, 72, 72, 78, 119,
126 –27, 130 –31,131–32,
155 –57, 165, 168, 176,
179, 183, 190, 217, 220,
223, 233, 238, 247, 265,
375
adolescents, 333 –34
alien self, 368
AvPD “extreme form ”,215
characteristics, 246
clinical example, 299
couples, 348
definition, 5
depressed patients, 234, 236,
240
eating disorders, 299, 303,
308, 310
quick reference, 59
trauma patients, 283 –84,
290
psychodynamic therapy, 2,
104, 225
psychoeducation, 69–71, 103,
236, 256, 260, 268, 274,
286
emergency care, 383
family session, 337
MBT for trauma, 287
trauma patients, 289398 Index
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
psychological crisis, 364
characteristics, 366
definition from patient ’s
perspective (MBT
approach), 365
four steps (post-
hospitalization), 370
Jill case study, 366, 371 –73,
374
Jill case study (exploration
of crisis), 377
Jill case study (first meeting
with emergency team),
375 –80
narrative, 372
relief, 365
triggers, 366
working definition, 365 –68
psychology, 163, 165, 170
psychopathology, 8, 17 –19,
209, 213, 353
characteristics, 245
transdiagnostic indicator,
216
psychosis, xii, 17, 231, 245,
253 –76
clinical deactivation, 264
common leitmotif, 261
continuum of severity, 263
first diagnosis, 256
further research required,
274
hallmark (dissociation), 266
hospitalization, 254 –55,
257, 259
information processing
biases, 266
phenomenological
accounts, 261
premorbid stage, 255
treatment structuring, 269
usage, 253
psychosis (key elements of
MBT practice), 267 –74
affective narrative, 273
Johanna case study,
271–72
mentalizing clinician –
patient relationship, 274
mentalizing process, 270 –71
non-mentalizing
(framework for clinical
intervention), 272
non-mentalizing modes,
271 –72
not-knowing stance, 269treatment and session
structure, 267 –68
psychosis (MBT clinical
approach), 253 –60
assessing developmental
stage of illness, 255
clinical actions required,
254
formulating concrete
treatment goals, 258 –60
identifying social resources
within treatment, 257 –58
key assumption, 266
main point, 260
Robert case study, 254,
257–58,270–71
staging, 260
psychosis (MBT-informed
understanding), 260 –67
clinical example, 262
clinical presentations,
264 –65
core self-disturbance (link
to non-mentalizing
modes), 265 –67
from neuroscience to
consulting room, 261 –64
psychosis and mentalizing
(historical links), 260 –61
psychosis (mentalizing
process)
critical aspect, 271
group setting, 270
individual setting, 270
key points, 271
psychoeducational setting,
270
psychosis patients
elephant in room, 273
memories of kindness
shown, 265
non-mentalizing modes,
265, 271
psychoeducational groups,
268
sensory-cognitive
disconnect, 266
psychotherapy, 15, 115 –16,
230, 256
essence, 103
generalist approach, x
inherently relational, 44
time-honored method,
148
psychotic disorders
usage, 253quality of life, 27, 29, 127, 252,
257 –58
RADLE sequence, 242
1. recognizing emotions,
242
2. amplifying emotions, 243
3. differentiating emotions,
243
4. linking emotions, 243
5. emotional cost, 243
randomized control trials, 27,
298, 315
mentalization-based
treatment, 27–29
Reading the Mind in the Eyes,
17, 328
real world, 5,142, 148
reciprocal adjustments, 106
Reflective Fostering, 356,
358 –60
Reflective Fostering
Programme, 359
design, 359
facilitators, 360
focus, 359
group-based, 359
pilot programme, 359
RCT (in progress), 360
sessions, 360
tools, 359 –60
reflective functioning, 1, 11,
15, 209 –10, 245, 321, 357
identical to “mentalizing ”,
357
Reflective Functioning
Questionnaire for Youth,
335
Reflective Functioning Scale,
357
Reflective Parenting, 356
aims, 358
definition, 357
emphasis, 357
group sessions (core
objective), 358
innovative approach, 357
key role of self-mentalizing,
357
tools, 357
Reflective Self-Function Scale,
357
rejection, 204, 206, 240
rejection sensitivity, 17, 23, 25,
53,57,123
relational activation, 159Index 399
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
relational mentalizing, 100,
103 –8, 152, 169, 220 –22,
231, 241
components, 103
depressed patients, 238
quintessential intervention
to activate we-mode, 103
series of steps, 104
shorthand term, 108
relational passport, 139, 139,
150
relational referencing, 284
resilience, 64, 98, 129, 234,
308, 351, 356, 361, 377
absence, 278
respect, 140, 141, 164, 170,
182, 185
revictimization, 284
rewind and reflect technique,
351
RFP. SeeReflective Fostering
Programme
ridicule, 215, 222
risk, 55, 121, 364
clinical intervention process
(summary), 117
mentalizing understanding,
117
Risk-Taking and Self-Harm
Inventory, 29
Robinson EA, 160
Robinson P, 311
role play, 115, 217, 220 –21,
223, 355
MBT-F exercise, 344
romantic relationships, 285
interpersonal trust (BPD
individuals versus control
group), 23
Rossouw T, 331, 336
Rubber Hand Illusion, 16
rumination, 235 –36, 284
SAD. Seesocial anxiety
disorder
safety learning, 26
safety planning, 121
Safier E, 347
Sahi RS, 24
salutogenesis, 240, 247 –48,
381
definition, 285
trauma patients, 288
Sarah case study, x–xi, 53
action person and outside-
in mind, 65assessment of mentalizing
profile, 55–58
attachment processes, 62
basic information, 53
contrary moves, 79
counter-relational
mentalizing, 109
cycle of problems, 67
elephant in room, 102
formulation, 65
group learning, xi
know and now mind, 65
MBT, 66
MBT Loop, 84
mentalizing affective
narrative, 98–100
non-mentalizing modes/
ineffective mentalizing,
59–60
not-knowing and managing
mentalizing process,
78–79
pretend mode, 96–97
problems, 65
relational mentalizing, 104,
107
relationship with son (Jack),
81
relationships, 66
at-risk patient (clinical
intervention process),
120,122,124, 126, 128,
130–31
strengths, 65
treatment aims, 66
treatment phase (empathic
validation, clarification,
elaboration of
experience), 71
wellness (context), 125
Sarah case study (MBT
Group), 137, 147
allocation of protagonists of
discussion, 143
first session, 139
group purpose, 142
group values, 140
online, 151
preparation of group for
entry of new patient, 139
triangulation, 145
schema-focused therapy
(SFT), 224 –25
schizophrenia, 25, 253
basis, 261
schizotypy, 255Schmidt U, 298, 305
school environment, 356
sculptures (MBT-F exercise),
344
secondary attachment
strategies, 282, 294
secondary representations, 10,
335
self and other, 9, 209
self representation, 218
self-agency, 186 –90
1. I-mode to me-mode, 186
2. recognition of others ’
emotional states, 187
3. working with shame as
problematic emotion,
188 –89
4. future self, 189
5. pretend mode, 189
6. working with anger as
problematic emotion, 190
self-awareness, 9, 237
self-compassion, 129, 189, 273
self-criticism, 71, 131, 189,
235 –36
self-devaluation, 161
self-esteem, 155, 157 –58,159,
160 –61,166, 181, 183,
190, 193, 204
threats, 176
self-expectation, 159,161
self-experience, 56, 57, 59, 72,
158, 159,164, 188, 210,
213, 221, 313
self-harm, 12, 14, 29 , 52,
116 –17, 127, 131,133,
190, 231, 245, 266, 277,
285, 328, 332, 335
adolescents (clinical
example), 336
can be experienced as relief,
302
function, 119
patient ’s unwillingness to
discuss, 129
simplified summary,
118 –20
self-harm enquiries
before event, 121
clinical top tip, 122
event itself, 118
fact-finding, 121–22, 123
following event, 122
self-identity, 328
threats, 176
self-image, 166400 Index
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
self-injury, 17, 28, 121, 129
self-perception, 24, 213, 223
self-regulation, 9, 19, 305, 309,
328
self-representations, 10, 166,
210
sense of self, 10, 13, 21, 73,
119, 126, 128
sexual abuse, 11, 73, 321
shame, 131, 157, 168, 178, 184,
192 –93, 198, 201, 210 –11,
221, 236 –37, 284
activation, 176 –77
clients with ASPD, 188
eating disorders, 304, 308
elephant in room, 188
multifaceted emotion,
188
prototypical events, 189
trauma patients, 293
shame –pride cycle, 309
Sharp C, 334
siding, 196, 199
Simonsen S, 209, 212
Skårderud F, 311
sleep, 282
social anxiety disorder, 17, 24,
204, 212, 214 –15,329,
334
social cognition, x, 6, 10,
15–16, 21, 34 –35, 303,
305, 328
definition, 18
eating disorders, 306 –7
social context, ix, 12, 175, 208,
264, 308 –9
neuro-economic tasks, 22
social environment, 178, 282,
310, 326, 356
social exclusion, 15–17, 38, 53,
179, 301, 306, 308
social interaction, 22, 115, 213
social learning, 17–21, 26 –27,
52, 179
application in wider
environment, 27
social media, 329
social mentalizing
foundations, 173
social network, 12, 175, 294,
304, 381
social perception, 300
social rejection, 24–25, 188
implicated in psychiatric
disorders, 24
social self, 307social self-regulation, xii,
311 –12
eating disorders, 307
emotional self as core
component of eating
disorders, 307
social sensitivity, 9, 47
social withdrawal, 188, 205,
303 –4, 308 –9, 314
social world, x, 3 –4, 20, 29, 55,
174, 176, 202, 215, 217,
334
somatic disorders, 282
somatic markers of emotions,
242
stabbings, 191 –92
stepping into someone else ’s
shoes (MBT-F exercise),
343
Stone MH, 2
stop and rewind, 242, 247, 323
Strange Stories task, 25
stress, 12, 68, 129, 174, 234,
237 –39, 281 –83
eating disorders, 302
stress system, 279, 281
subdominant narratives,
102 –3
substance abuse, 15, 54
subtle challenges, 194
suicidal ideation, 117, 121,
129, 258, 366
suicidality, 12, 52, 129, 149,
171, 245, 334 –35, 368
suicide, 14, 231, 234, 236
suicide attempts, 13, 28,
116 –17, 121, 127, 266,
369
clinical example (Jill), 366
generic MBT intervention
process applies, 118
patient ’s unwillingness to
discuss, 129
simplified summary,
118 –20
suicide risk, 278, 364, 368, 385
supervision. See also MBT
supervision
central part of MBT, 224
supervisors, 126
support, 323 –24
Target M, 302, 321
TAU. Seetreatment as usual
teasing, 10, 306
telehealth, 148teleological mode, 5,59, 60,
62,64, 68, 72, 80, 123,
126 –27, 155, 157, 176,
179, 183, 192, 225, 231,
238, 247, 375
adolescents, 334
at-risk patient, 119
clinical example, 301
couples, 348
depressed patients, 236, 240
eating disorders, 300, 303
trauma patients, 284 –85
Theory of Mind, 1–2, 4, 9 –10,
228, 305
eating disorders, 306 –7
therapeutic alliance, 44, 69, 97,
149, 163, 166 –67, 173,
180, 196, 231, 281, 325
therapeutic games, 220 –23,
226, 268
benefits for clinician, 222
therapeutic relationship, 211,
225, 233, 241, 246
depressed patients, 238
mentalizing, 247
thick-skinned narcissism, 163
thin-skinned narcissism, 163
self-expectation and self-
devaluation, 161
third-person perspective,
215 –16, 220
threats to self, 233
time, 324, 365, 368
toddlers, 8, 10
tone of voice, 58, 159, 177,
195, 219, 322
trait inference, 9
transdiagnostic approach, ix–x
transference tracers
definition, 103
trauma, 11, 13, 277 –97, 326,
369
best considered as
transdiagnostic factor,
277
developmental approach, 26
high rates of comorbidity,
278
Lydia case study, 277,
285 –86,292
mentalization-based
treatment, 286 –88
mentalizing, xii, 25 –26,279
re-enactment cycles, 280
thought avoidance, 293
types, 278Index 401
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
trauma (cont.)
typical features (clinical
expression), 280
underlying biobehavioral
systems, 281
trauma (mentalizing
perspective), 278 –86
epistemic trust (problems),
285
stress and attachment,
281 –83
trauma and mentalizing,
283 –85
trauma continuum, 278
trauma memories, 83, 283
Treasure J, 305
treatment as usual, 27–29
treatment phase (MBT clinical
process), 71–113
contrary moves, 79–82
counter-relational
mentalizing, 108 –13
creating compassionate
story, 97–101
elephant in room, 120,126,
128, 130
elephant in room (exploring
affect focus), 102 –3
empathic validation,
clarification, elaboration
of experience, 71–73low mentalizing (clinician
intervention), 82–97
mentalizing affective
narrative, 97–101
not-knowing and managing
the mentalizing process,
77–79
relational mentalizing,
103 –8
tree of social cognition, 8–9
triangulation, 146 –48
clinical example, 144
trust, 29, 115, 183, 189
BPD, 21–25
trust game, 23
Trust Scenario Questionnaire,
22
trusted friend, 101
Tsakiris M, 369
twins, 18
United States, 2
University College London,
xiii
validation of feelings
MBT for trauma, 287
values sheet, 141, 148
video, 115, 223
violence, 12, 117, 175, 178 –79,
180, 183 –84, 190, 200mentalizing, 175 –78
simplified summary,
118 –20
virtual and digital health
(online MBT),
148 –53
vulnerable narcissism, 157,
159, 166, 167, 172
same as thin-skinned
narcissism, 156
vulnerable self, 148
we-mode, 46, 50, 66, 98, 100,
102 –4, 106, 108 ,120, 136,
142 –43, 148, 152, 166 –67,
169 –70, 173, 178, 183,
185, 189, 222, 286, 290,
356
definition, 21, 107
entry point, not end of
process, 107
WhatsApp, 194
Winnicott DW, 60, 370
working formulation, 67–68,
71
worthlessness, 210
young adulthood, 9, 16
Zeegers MAJ, 11402 Index
h di 00 98088960 4020 blihd li b C bid  i i 
